LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST:
The New Testament Illustrated by Recently Discovered Texts of the Graeco- Roman World
BY
Do '"ADOLF DEISSMANN
D.THEOL, (MARBURG), D.D. (ABERDEEN, ST. ANDREWS, MANCHESTER); PROFESSOR OF NEW TESTAMENT EXEGESIS IN THE UNIVERSITY OF BERLIN; CORRESPONDING MEMBER OF THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE OF THE GERMAN REICH
pO TRANSLATED BY
LIONEL R. M. STRACHAN, M.A.-
GERMAN LECTURER IN THE UNIVERSITY OF BIRMINGHAM; ! FORMERLY SCHOLAR OF ST, JOHN’S COLLEGE, OXFORD
“NEW AND COMPLETELY REVISED EDITION WITH EIGHTY-FIVE ILLUSTRATIONS FROM THE LATEST GERMAN EDITION
URIS LIBRARY
AUG 3 0 199] a
HARPER & BROTHERS NEW YORK and LONDON
) /
ἣν τὸ φῶς τὸ ἀληθινόν, ὃ φωτίζει πάντα ἄνθρωπον, ἐρχόμενον εἰς τὸν κόσμον.
ALMAE MATRI ABERDONENSI
ft
SACRUM
PREFACE TO THE FOURTH! EDITION
THE cruel fate that overtook mankind in 1914 made deep inroads even on the studies to which this book is devoted. It carried off on the battlefield, or by starvation, privation and sorrow of heart, many of the scholars, middle-aged as well as young, who are named in the following pages, some of them tried and trusted friends of my own; and of the survivors it also demanded its tribute. Me it kept (to say nought of other things) for full seven years almost completely cut off from my old field of study. From 1914 to 1921, in such hours as were not claimed by the University, I devoted myself almost exclusively to fostering the solidarity which should prevail amongst all Protestants and throughout oecumenical Christen- dom, and which was most seriously endangered by the struggle of the nations. This I attempted by means of my “ Evan- gelischer Wochenbrief ’’ (circulated from Advent 1914 to the beginning of 1917 also in English, under the title ‘‘ Protestant Weekly Letter”’), by an extensive daily correspondence with indi- viduals in connexion therewith, by organising, and by a consider- able amount of attendance at conferences at home and abroad.
Meanwhile the book had long been out of print. Made widely known in three? German and two® English editions, there was still a considerable demand for it during and after the war. As early as May 1915 my publisher, Dr. Paul Siebeck, who had always shown sympathetic interest in the book, and who has since passed away with his life’s work abundantly prospered, drew up with me a contract for the new edition. But it was.not until I had brought the ‘‘ Evangelischer Wochen- brief ” to a close, at the end of 1921, that I was able to pursue with energy the task of revision, hand in hand with the present
1 [So called, because the second edition was curiously styled ‘‘ second and third.”——TR.]
2 (Really two, 1908 and 1909.—TR.] 3 [First edition, 1910; reprinted 1911.—TRr.]
1x
Χ PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION
heads of my old firm of publishers, who carry on the paternal tradition with all loyalty.
I now present the fourth German edition as the firstfruit of my restored leisure. I am fully entitled to call it ‘“‘ completely revised’’: there is scarcely a page to be found that has not been altered (in some cases very considerably), and of new matter, the product of the extraordinarily rich harvest in the scientific study of antiquity since 1909, there is also no lack. I refer, by way of illustration, to the enrichment of the collection of ancient letters by certain items which, I think, may be described as gems.
As regards the form of the book I have altered nothing, although it would not have. been difficult to hit the taste of those who think more highly of a learned work the more unreadable it is. I had attempted (successfully, it seems) to shape the material, by nature difficult and intractable, in such fashion that, while research is promoted, even the novice, educated men and women, practical people with intellectual interests, may be able to follow the main course of the investi- gation with some appreciation. This attempt was the outcome of my own strongly developed general sense of form, and further of the conviction that the literature of learning, if it is going to be literature and not a labyrinth of parentheses, a chaos of snippets, and a pasting together of paper slips, must aim at artistic forms of its own. Though assigned myself to the literary class, I have certainly a great weakness for the non- literary and no small delight in the merely literary man’s unconscious irony of himself. But that does not prevent me from wishing to be seriously literary in literary things.
The demand for attention to form must be addressed with double emphasis to our literature of research in these present times, betokening, as they do, a catastrophe to German science and learning. A German book on any learned subject cannot
1 Cf. Adolf von Harnack’s open letter to Viscount Haldane on the crisis in German science and learning, in the.“ Berliner Tageblatt,” No. 586, of 24 Dec., 1922. [There followed, in Feb. 1923, an appeal for British assistance to German Universities, signed by Troeltsch, Deissmann, Von Dobschiitz, and Rudolf Eucken. The Society of Friends was the first body to undertake University relief work in Germany after the Armistice, and the work was
continued by the World Student Christian Federation and the Universities Committee of the Imperial War Relief Fund.—Tr.]
PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION xi
be printed to-day without outside assistance, unless it is written in a style intelligible to readers at home and abroad far beyond the circle of the specialists. That, however, is impossible in the case of very many, often the soundest, particular investi- gations in certain branches of learning. But researches dealing with the body and soul of the New Testament, the Book of Humanity, can set themselves this aim. It must be possible so to shape them that they may find, among the hundreds of millions accessible to the indirect or direct influence of the New Testament, some thousands able to follow the path of the ‘investigator in its main lines with pleasurable understanding. Author and publisher have again attached special importance to the facsimiles of ancient texts. It has been possible’ to increase their number considerably, and for that readers will join me in gratitude to the kindly helpers: Mr. H. I. Bell (of the British Museum), Mr. C. C. Edgar (of the Cairo Museum), Mr. Ellis H. Minns (of Cambridge, England), Sir William M. Ramsay (Edinburgh), the Société des Etudes Juives (Paris), ΤῸ. Weissbrodt (Braunsberg), Theodor Wiegand (Berlin). These names, and the frequent references in the text to valuable information received from cousins of the craft at home and abroad, may show moreover that as regards the study of the New Testament the barbed-wire entanglements of the evil years (cf. Eph. ii. 14) have been broken down. In preparing the new edition I have everywhere met with the old obliging- ness and confidence. Very special gratitude is due to my Berlin friends, Paul M. Meyer and Ulrich Wilcken. .. .
ADOLF DEISSMANN. Berlin-Wilmersdorf
Prinzregentenstr. 6 26 Dec., 1922.
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
I was in the midst of preparations for a second Anatolian journey when I heard from Dr. Paul Siebeck, about Christmas, 1908, that the first edition was nearly exhausted. I was able, however, before my departure, to revise the book, making improvements and additions to fit it for its new public appearance. Many readers will welcome the considerable increase in the number of illustrations. I am indebted to many friends and colleagues who have corrected me and added to my knowledge by letter or in reviews. Numerous instances of this indebtedness will be found in the notes. . . .
My second journey, begun on 24 February and safely ended on 6 May, 1909, was undertaken with financial assistance from the Prussian Ministry of Education. I travelled with my friends Carl Schmidt, Wilhelm Weber, and one younger com- panion. Our route led us vié Constantinople to Asia Minor (Eski Shehr, Angora, Konieh and environs, Afium-Kara-Hissar, [Ala-shehr Philadelphia, Sardis,] Smyrna, Ephesus, Laodicea, Hierapolis, Mersina, Pompeiopolis, Tarsus), Syria (Alexandretta, Antioch on the Orontes, Beyrout, Baalbec, Damascus), Galilee (Tiberias, Tell Hum Capernaum and environs, Nazareth), Haifa with Carmel, Samaria, Judaea (Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Jericho, Dead Sea, Jordan, Jaffa), and Lower Egypt (Port Said, Cairo and environs, Alexandria). This long itinerary will gain in distinctness if I say, speaking in terms of the New Testament, that I was privileged to see the homes of St. Paul and the Saviour Himself, and the principal roads traversed by them, so far as these scenes of New Testament story were not yet known to me from my first journey.
Looking back on the second journey, which took me also for a brief space into the homeland of the papyri and ostraca of which use is made in this book, I consider it an advantage that I did not see Palestine until after I had seen Asia Minor and
ω xi
xiv PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
Syria. The great uniformity of the culture of the Mediter- ranean lands was thus brought home to me more clearly, and I think also that I was thus better prepared to realise the peculiar characteristics of Palestine. I consider it equally important that Jerusalem should be entered from the north, by the high-road from Galilee. That is the historical road to the Holy City, the pilgrims’ way. Thus Jesus as a boy of twelve, thus St. Paul as a young man, and thus the Crusaders advanced to conquer the city, and this ought still to be the only approach to Jerusalem.
Only thus was it that Jerusalem became to me in many respects the climax of the whole expedition. The-mass of pathetic facts and problems connected with a unique past, the motley commotion in the social and religious present, where, however, vigorous types of ancient piety have kept alive to this day—in all this the multitude of single observations accumulated on the journey united to form one great general impression of the essential character and value of the religious East, which is a unity amidst all the confusion of tongues and all the play of colours in the costumes.
Of course it has not been possible for me yet to work up these observations. For that I must have time. But when I think of all that I have learnt (I trust) for the better under- standing of the gospels, the letters of St. Paul, the Acts of the Apostles, and the Revelation of St. John, I cannot but express my gratitude to the Ministry of Education for enabling me to undertake this journey. I wish that right many of my fellow- students might be given the same opportunity of beholding with their own eyes the scenes of gospel and Primitive Christian history. The New Testament is the most important monument of the East that we possess ; those who study it have therefore a claim upon the East.
ADOLF DEISSMANN. Berlin-Wilmersdorf,
9 June, 1909,
PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION
“ LicuT from the East ’—it is a curious title for the book, but before you censure it just look for a moment at the Eastern sunshine. On the castled height of Pergamum observe the wondrous light bathing the marble of Hellenistic temples at noonday. At Hagios Elias in Thera look with hushed rapture upon the golden shimmer of the same light over the endless expanse of the Mediterranean, and then in the vino santo of the hospitable monks divine the glow of that same sun. Mark what tones this light has at command even within stone walls, when at Ephesus a patch of deep blue sky gleams through the roof of a ruinous mosque upon an ancient column now mated to a fig-tree. Nay, let but a single beam of the Eastern sun peep through a chink of the door into the darkness of a poor Panagia chapel: a dawning begins, a sparkling and quickening; the one beam seems to wax twofold, tenfold; day breaks, you take in the pious meaning of the wall frescoes and the inscribed words, and the miserable poverty that built the shrine is forgotten.
Make that sunbeam your own and take it with you to the scene of your labours on the other side of the Alps. If you have ancient texts to decipher, the sunbeam will bring stone and potsherd to speech. If you have sculptures of the Medi- terranean world to scrutinise, the sunbeam will put life into them for you—men, horses, giants, and all. And if you have been found worthy to study the sacred Scriptures, the sunbeam will reanimate the apostles and evangelists, will bring out with greater distinctness the august figure of the Redeemer from the East, Him whom the Church is bound to reverence and to obey.
And then, if you speak of the East, you cannot help yourself : made happy by its marvels, thankful for its gifts, you must speak of the light of the East.
a, XV
xvi PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION
After fifteen years spent in studying the Greek Bible and other secular documents of the Hellenistic East, it was a matter of extreme moment to me to be privileged in the spring months of 1906 to take part in an expedition, assisted by a grant from the Baden Ministry of Education, for study purposes to Vienna, Buda Pesth, Bucharest, Constantinople, Asia Minor, Greece with the principal islands, and Southern Italy. The tour was organised and conducted in masterly fashion by Friedrich von Duhn. In the great museums and at the centres where inter- national excavations are in progress we had not only him to instruct us, but the foremost authorities in archaeology and epigraphy—Austrians, Hungarians, Roumanians, Turks, our own German countrymen, Greeks, Englishmen, Frenchmen, and Italians—rendered us the greatest assistance in our studies. We were indebted most particularly to Wilhelm Dérpfeld and my old schoolfellow Theodor Wiegand. For me personally the whole expedition was hallowed with peculiar, unforgettable solemnity owing to a deeply affecting family bereavement, the sudden news of which reached me at Smyrna. Thus it dwells in my memory now as a great event to which I owe both widening and deepening of experience.
On my arrival home I began to write a book, combining my impressions of the tour with observations I had already made in the course of my studies. The foundation was provided by a course of lectures! which I gave at the Hochstift, Frankfort on the Main, in 1905, and which appeared afterwards in English, first in serial 3 and then in book form.’ I was also able to make use of smaller articles of mine, most of which appeared in Die Christliche Welt, some being reprinted with my permission in the eighth volume of Ernst Lohmann’s journal, Sonnen- ~ Aufgang : Mitteilungen aus dem Orient (1906). j
The linguistic details in Chapter 11. of the present book are to some extent supplemented in my Cambridge lectures,’ one of which is devoted to Septuagint philology. Of the new and great tasks which the new texts set before the Séptuagint
1 An abstract of the course, entitled ‘‘ Das Neue Testament und die Schrift- denkmaler der rémischen Kaiserzeit,” was printed in the Jahvbuch des Freien Deutschen Hochstifts zu Frankfurt-am Main, 1905, pp. 79-95.
2 The Expository Times, October 1906 to April 1907.
3 New Light on the New Testament, Edinburgh, 1907.
* The Philology of the Greek Bible, London, 1908.
PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION xvii
scholar I have spoken but occasionally in the present book; but nearly all the observations that I have brought together on the New Testament could be carried further back and applied in like manner to the Greek Old Testament.
At the desire of my publisher, Dr. Paul Siebeck, who displayed great and intelligent interest in the whole field of my researches, I have written the main text of the book (as distinct from the footnotes) in a manner to be understood in all essentials by the general reader without specialist knowledge. For the same reason the Greek and Latin texts have been furnished with translations—a good means, by the way, of enabling the author to check his impressions. Dr. Siebeck complied most willingly with my suggestion that a large number of the more important texts should be shown in facsimile. In obtaining the necessary photographs, rubbings, etc., I was assisted by several scholars and publishers at home and abroad, and with especial liberality by the Directors of the Royal Museums (Berlin), the Reichs- post Museum (Berlin), the Epigraphical Commission of the Royal Prussian Academy of Sciences, Lord Amherst of Hackney, the Heidelberg University Library, the Egypt Exploration Fund (London), the British Museum, and the Imperial Austrian Archaeological Institute. For all this aid I return respectful thanks.
From the beginning I was accompanied in my work by the practical sympathy of my friend Ulrich Wilcken, who was also one of those who helped by reading the proofs. The extent of . my indebtedness to this pioneer worker in classical antiquities cannot be gauged from the mere quotations in the book itself... .
Little did I dream in October last (1907), when the book began to be printed, that its completion would mark my fare- well to the University of Heidelberg. Even after my summons to another sphere of work I should have preferred to be able to publish it in my capacity as a Heidelberg Professor, for it is a Heidelberg book. But that summons caused the printing to be delayed some weeks. If I am thus unable to write Heidelberg after my name on the title-page, I must at least in this place acknowledge what help and stimulus, what true fellowship and friendship Heidelberg has brought me. I
XViil PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION
regard it as a most kindly dispensation of Providence that for more than ten years I have been privileged to live, work, and learn in this ancient University—and for just those ten years in which, while one’s own aims become gradually clearer, one is still independent and receptive enough to be moulded by the most various kinds of men and institutions. _
ADOLF DEISSMANN. Castagnola, Lake of Lugano 19 March, 1908.
TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE
THE translation of my friend Deissmann’s Licht vom Osten which I originally made from the “ second and third ” edition of the German work (Tiibingen, 1909) has at length been adapted in conformity with the “ fourth, completely revised ” and enlarged edition of 1923. The circumstances under which the revision was undertaken are described in the author’s Preface. I should like to add that between 22 Nov., 1914, and 23 April,1918, a certain portion of the time given to “ fostering Christian solidarity '’ was spent in tedious journeys half-way round Berlin to visit his English translator in internment either at Plétzensee Prison or at Ruhleben. Every two months or so a long, weary journey was undertaken just for the sake of cheering an enemy alien by half-an-hour’s talk under the eye of soldiers in a guard-room; 21 visits were paid in all, permission having to be obtained for each, not without difficulty, from the military authorities. Rare indeed was the privilege. And the visitor never came empty-handed, but brought with him mental pabulum and always some‘creature comforts, even when the pinch was being felt in the homes of Germany. ἐν φυλακῇ ἤμην, καὶ ἤλθετε πρός pe.
As in the case of the first edition of this book, the author has read the proofs and replied to a number of questions submitted to him. Additions for which the translator bears the responsibility are marked (Tr.). Thanks fo Professor W. M. Calder and the publishers, the number of illustrations has been increased by two (Figs. 2 and 53), not included in the German edition, making a total of 85 illustrations as compared with the 68 given in 1910. The facsimiles have their value not only for the learned, who (by taking pains) can spell out a good deal of the old writing, but also for the unlearned. Everybody can gain from them, as the author says (p. 150), some idea of the inimitable individuality of each papyrus letter. “ That autograph Letter, it was once all luminous as a burning beacon, every word of it a live coal, in its time; it was once a piece of the general fire and light of Human Life, that Letter! Neither is it yet entirely extinct: well read, there is still in it light enough to exhibit its own self; nay, to diffuse a faint authentic twilight some distance round it. Heaped embers which in the daylight looked black, may still look ved in the
xx
ΧΧ TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE
utter darkness. These Letters . . . will convince any man that the Past did exist! By degrees the combined small twilights may produce a kind of general feeble twilight, rendering the Past credible, the Ghosts of the Past in some glimpses of them visible ! "4
In the translations of the Greek texts I was naturally guided by the German, but I did not feel called upon to follow it literally. Even the translations of papyrus letters by Grenfell and Hunt, which are of course made directly from the Greek, and which in some cases have already attained popular celebrity, did not seem to be the right thing for me to use, though I have carefully considered . them. There is a modern ring about them ? which separates them off from the diction of the English Bible, and so would have weakened the comparison which it is a main object of this book to make between the sacred and profane memorials of Hellenistic Greek. I therefore have tried to render the Greek literally in language as far as possible resembling that of the Authorised Version and the Revised Version. If the word before me occurs in the Greek Bible my principle is to adopt’ by preference one of the renderings of King James’s translators. It is hoped that in this way the kinship of these texts with the style and language of the Bible may be made more conspicuous, and that even a reader who neglects the Greek may be struck by the frequent Biblical echoes. The result may leave something to be desired as regards clearness, but is it right in translating an ancient letter to give it a perspicuity which the original does not possess? And that ancient letters are not always perspicuous any person acquainted only with English may see for himself if he will trouble to look at even a modernised edition of the fifteenth-century Paston Letters.
This subject is, I think, sufficiently important to be illustrated by a comparison. Take these two renderings of a “ Saying ’’ in the second Logia fragment from Oxyrhynchus :—
Jesus saith: Let him that seeketh Jesus saith: Let not him who
. not cease ... until he findeth, | seeks . . . cease until he finds, and when he findeth he shall be | and when he finds he shall be amazed, and having been amazed | astonished; astonished he _ shall
he shall reign, and having reigned | reach the kingdom, and having he shall rest. reached the kingdom he shall rest.
The first is as printed at p. 426 below, the second is by Grenfell and Hunt. The forms seeketh, findeth, him that are preferred to seeks, finds, him who as being more archaic and Biblical. The Greek word θαμβέω is translated amaze in Mark i. 27, x. 32, astonish in Mark x. 24, Acts ix. 6; the R.V. uses amaze in each place, except in Acts
1 Carlyle, Oliver Cromwell's Letters and Speeches, Introduction, Ch. V. 2 Cf. the author’s protest about a similar matter, p. 11, n. 3 below.
TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE xxi
ix.-6, where the word disappears from the text. So also βασιλεύω is translated reign in Matt. ii. 22, Rom. v. 14, 17, 21, vi. 12, 1 Cor. iv. 8 (A.V. and R.V.). Note that and has dropped out before the second astonished. It is unnecessary to give further details, but I suppose there is not one of the translated texts but contains at least one instance of specially chosen wording on these principles.
In the German edition the diacritical marks employed in the Greek texts receive as a rule no explanation. I think, however, there may be many readers able to appreciate such things who are nevertheless not quite certain of their precise signification. The following list is based on Grenfell and Hunt’s introductory note to the Amherst Papyri :—
Square brackets [ ] indicate a lacuna, ¢.g. pp. 134, 139 f., 151 ff., 162, 164f., 173f., 179.
Round brackets ( ) indicate the extension of an abbreviation, the resolution of a ligature or symbol, e.g. pp. 166, 171, 173. Angular brackets < > indicate that the letters enclosed in them were omitted (i.e. not written) in the original, e.g. pp. 151, 168,174. (In the translation on p. 259 they indicate a word and on p. 295 a letter which, though actually written in the
Greek, should be omitted.)
Double square brackets [[ ]] indicate that the letters enclosed in them were deleted in the original. See Ρ. 153 and p. 165, n. 4.
Curly brackets { } indicate that the letters enclosed in them are superfluous. See p. 194.
Dots within brackets indicate the approximate number of letters missing, ¢.g. pp. I12I, 140, 152, 162, 179.
Dots outside brackets indicate mutilated or otherwise illegible letters, e.g. pp. 121, 179.
Dots under letters indicate a probable but not certain reading, e.g. pp. 121, 152f., 162, 164f., 174, 184, 187, 204.
Dashes under letters indicate an almost certain reading, e.g. pp. 174, 179, 184, 187.
A dash above a letter indicates a contraction, e.g. p. 216, lines 14 (Guapriq—dpaprinvy), 24, 28, p. 405 f. Sometimes it means that the letter is used as a numeral, e.g. pp. 176, 200, 202.
The mysterious é on p. 187, line 23, is perhaps a numeral (= 5).
An oblique stroke / indicates (p. 103, n. 4; p. 388) the point where a new line begins in the original.
The comparatively few abbreviations used in the book will, it is hoped, explain themselves. ‘‘ P.S.I.,” which occurs at p. 155, n. 2, ‘and p. 156, n. 2, might be puzzling, but is explained at p. 152, n. 2.
ΧΧΙΪ TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE
A small numeral above the line after the name of a book (thus: Sylloge*) indicates the edition. A sfecial monstrosity of this kind occurs at p. 333, n. 1, where Kommentar, 8087 denotes the eighth edition of vol. 8, and the seventh edition of vol. 9, which are bound up together. At p. 226, n. 4, and p. 270 the symbol || means “ parallel with.”
The Indices may still be regarded as of the author’s own design, but with the improvements retained which 1 introduced into the first English edition. When references are given not by the page only, but also by the number of the footnote, this number is often to be taken as a finger-post to a certain part of the text as well as to the remark at the foot of the page.
L. R. M. 5. Birmingham, 24 Feb. 1927.
CONTENTS
CHAPTER I
PAGE
THE PROBLEM—DISCOVERY AND NATURE OF THE NEW TEXTS. ἢ A : : ‘ : . I-61 1. The Problem F F eS Ξ i : I 2. The Texts . ; : : i : : . II (a) Inscriptions 3 : ‘ j : . XII (ὃ) Papyri. " ; ᾿ ᾿ F . 24 (c) Ostraca . ; 5 : ; : - 50
CHAPTER II
THE LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT ILLUSTRATED FROM THE NEw TEXTS : : ; 62-145
1. The Historical and the Dogmatic Method of New Testament Philology. Principal Problems . . 62
2. The New Testament a Record of late Colloquial Greek . : . ; : : ‘ . 69 3. Examples . é : : : . 92 A. Phonology and Reaencs : ‘ : - 72 B. Onomatology . : : é ΐ 2 93 C. Vocabulary. , ‘ : : : . 74 (a) Words : ᾧ . : . 74 (ὃ) Meanings of Words : : . 107 (c) Standing Phrases and Fixed Honivslae . στό D. Syntax. : . . ‘ : . 11 E. Style 3 : - 31
4. The Essential Character of the Ge testi . 143 xxiii
Xxiv
CONTENTS
CHAPTER III
Tue New TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE, ILLUSTRATED BY THE
PAGE
New TEXtTs 146-251
I.. The Problem of the Literary ‘Development of Christianity 146
2. The Essential Distinction Gen Literary” sd “ Non-Literary ” 148
3. A Series of Twenty-six Ancient Letiss “(rom Originals), representative of Non-Literary Writing 149
4. The Essential Distinction between the Letter and the Epistle 227 5. Ancient Letters and ipistles 230 6. Primitive Christian Letters . 233 7. Primitive Christian Epistles . 242 8. The Literary Development of Primitive Christianity 245 g. The Essential Character of the New Testament 250
CHAPTER IV
SociAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY IN THE NEW TESTAMENT, ILLUSTRATED FROM THE NEW TEXTs . 252-392
I. Clues in the New Testament referring to the Subject. Remarks on Method. 252 .2. The Cultural Background of Primitive Christianity 267
3. The Religious World Sontemporaty with Primitive Christianity : : 284 4. The Competing Cults . 288
5. Types of Individual Souls ee the Aseient Non- Literary Classes . 290
6. Stimuli derived from Contemporary Popilar Religion . 300
7. Stimuli derived form Contemporary Popular Morality 308 8. Stimuli derived from ἼΗΙ Bomulas Dae . 318
g. Christ and the Caesars: Parallelism in the Technical Language of their Cults . 338
1o. The Theological and the ReMi: Bidient in Primitive Christianity 378
11. The Forces enabling Primitive Christianity ἴο gain Converts 384
12.
The Essential Charibier of ie ΠΝ Tetament
391
CONTENTS XXV
CHAPTER V
7 PAGE
RETROSPECT—FUTURE WoRK OF RESEARCH : . 303-400
I. Retrospect : ᾿ 393
2. Christianity Popular in its Pateiealilies and Borns ,
of Expression . : : : : - 305
3. Future Work for the Philologist ‘ F ; . 307
4. Future Work for the Theologian . ἢ : . 400
5. The New Testament Lexicon ‘ 3 ; . 2401 APPENDIX I
JEWISH PRAYERS FOR VENGEANCE FOUND AT RHENEIA . . 413
APPENDIX II
ON THE TEXT OF THE SECOND LOGIA FRAGMENT FROM OXYRHYNCHUS ᾿ : ὗ ᾿ ὶ ᾿ . 425
APPENDIX III
THE SUPPOSED FRAGMENT OF A GOSPEL AT CAIRO : . 430
APPENDIX IV
Lucitus—LUKE ᾿ ἢ ‘ : ᾿ 2 : . 435
APPENDIX V
THE SYNAGOGUE INSCRIPTION OF THEODOTUS AT JERUSALEM . 439
APPENDIX VI
THE DiptycuH ΟΕ M. VALERIUS QUADRATUS, A VETERAN OF THE JERUSALEM CAMPAIGN . . . : . 442
APPENDIX VII
Tue EpitapH ΟΕ Recina, A RoMAN JEwEesSs  . - - 447
Χχνὶ CONTENTS
APPENDIX VIII
A JewisH INSCRIPTION IN THE THEATRE AT MILETUS
APPENDIX ΙΧ
THE SO-CALLED “‘ PLANETARY INSCRIPTION ” IN THE THEATRE
AT MILETUS A LATE CHRISTIAN PROTECTIVE CHARM
APPENDIX X
UNRECOGNISED BIBLICAL QUOTATIONS IN SYRIAN AND MESO-
POTAMIAN INSCRIPTIONS
APPENDIX XI
KavutTsky’s ‘‘ ORIGIN OF CHRISTIANITY ”
x
INDICES
. PLACES
. ANCIENT PERSONS
. WoRDS AND PHRASES . SUBJECTS .
. MoDERN PERSONS
. PASSAGES CITED
(A) Greek Bible Septuagint Aquila and dy anvinachiis New Testament
(B) Latin Bible
(C) Inscriptions :
(D) Papyri and Parchments
(E) Ostraca .
(F) Wooden Tablets:
(G) Glass Goblets .
(H) Coins
(I) Ancient Authors fothes ἕξη Biblical) .
PAGE
451
453
461
465
469 476 485 492 510 522 522 522 523 523 528 528 531 533 533 533 533 533
14.
15.
ILLUSTRATIONS
FACING PAGE
A Quirinius Inscription from Antioch in Pisidia: Base of a Statue of C. Caristanius, Praefect of the Governor P. Sulpicius Quirinius; possibly dating from the first ony governorship of Quirinius (11-8 B.c.?) .
Roman Milestone, 6 B.c., at Yonuslar, passed iy Paul and Barnabas on the road to Iconium. From a photograph by ri W. Μ. sii of Balliol fie Oxford δ μον ϑοὴ of 1924
Door Inscription from een at Corinth, peas
6
Period. Now in Corinth Museum τ F ; Page 16
Contract of Sale relating to a Parcel of Vineyard. Parch- ment from Kopanis in the Kingdom of Saag 88 B.c.
Now in the British Museum . . . Facing Page 32
Hereditary Lease of a Vineyard. Parchment from Kopanis in the Kingdom of Parthia, 22-21 B.c. Now in the British Museum
Ostracon from Upper oo inscribed site Luke xxii. 70 Ἢ 7th cent. A.D. Now in the Institut he d'Archéologie orientale, Cairo . ᾿ a τ
Site of the Excavations in Ῥοεῖοϑ. From a photograph’ by Miss M. C. de Graffenried
Tombstone from Bingerbriick, early παρειαὶ Period. Now at Kreuznach : Ε ‘ ᾿ : . :
Limestone Block from the Temple of Herod at Jerusalem, inscribed with a warning notice. Early Imperial Period. Now in the Imperial New Museum at Constantinople
Wooden Mummy-label from Egypt, Imperial Period .
Stele with Decree of Honour from Syme, 2nd cent.B.c. Now in the chapel of St. Michael Tharrinos, Syme .
Ostracon, Thebes, 4 August, 63 A.D. Receipt for Isis Collection. Now in the Berlih Museum :
Limestone Slab, Magnesia on the Maeander, 138 or 132 B.c. Judicial Award by the aa abana lines cans Now in the Berlin Museum :
Ostracon, Thebes, 32-33 A.D. Gee aa for Alien Tax. Now in the Author’s collection ὃ ὃ
Ostracon, Thebes, 2nd cent. a.p. Transfer sO Now in the Author’s collection. ᾧ Ν δ ὃ ‘ 5
33
58
δι΄
74
80 I0o
103
105
106
111
121
XXVili ILLUSTRATIONS
16.
17.
FACING PAGE
Inscription on a Glass Goblet, probably from Syria, 1st cent. A.D. Now in the possession of Theodor Wiegand
Isis Inscription from Ios. Writing of the (2nd or) 3rd cent. A.D. Contents ee Now in the Church of St. John the Divine, Ios
18, 19. The Oldest Greek Letter yet discovered, Address (Fig. 18)
20.
21.
22.
26.
and Text (Fig. 19): Mnesiergus of Athens to his House- mates. Leaden tablet, 4th cent. B.c. Now in the Berlin Museum. ; ' . : ξ 3 3 .
Letter from Zoilus, a servant of Sarapis, to Apollonius, an Egyptian minister of finance, Alexandria, 258-257 B.c. Papyrus from a au (Fayam). Now in the Cairo Museum : ‘ Β Ὁ
Letter from Zoilus to Apollonius: Writing on the Verso
Letters from Tubias, Sheikh of the Ammonites, to Apollonius, Egyptian minister of finance, and to King Ptolemy II., Philadelphus, Transjordania, 257-256 B.c. Papyrus from Philadelphia (Fayim). Now in the Cairo Museum . ᾿
Letters from Tubias to Apollonius and to me iis 11: Writing on the Verso 4
Letter from Demophon, a wealthy ἜΝ to Ptolemaeus, a police official, civca 245 B.c. Papyrus from Hibeh. Now in the Museum of Victoria Liang Toronto, Canada ‘i ὦ é .
Letter from Asclepiades, an Egyptian landowner, to Portis. Ptolemaic Period. Ostracon from Thebes. Now in the possession of Ulrich Wilcken ἃ i
Letter from Hilarion, an Egyptian labourer, to Alis, his wife. Papyrus, written at Alexandria, 17 June, 1 B.c. Now in the possession of Victoria University, Toronto, Canada
27,28. Letter from Mystarion, an Egyptian olive-planter, to
29.
30.
31.
32.
Stotoétis, a chief priest, Address (Fig. 27) and Text (Fig. 28), 12 September, 50 A.D. Papyrus from the Beye Now in the Reichspost Museum at Berlin
Letter from Harmiysis, a small Egyptian farmer, to Papiscus, an official, and others, 24 July, 66 a.p., lines 1-31. Papyrus from Oxyrhynehus. Now in the Cambridge University Library : é : . :
Letter from Nearchus, an Egyptian, to Heliodorus, 1st or and cent. A.D. ued from » Egypt. Now in the British Museum
Letter from Irene, an Egyptian, to a Satie in rere 2nd cent. A.D. Papyrus from ἐνὸς ἈΝ Now in the Library of Yale University . ΟΣ ᾿
Letter from Apion, an Egyptian soldier in the Roman Navy, to his father Epimachus, Misenum, 2nd cent. a.p. Papyrus from the Fayam. Now in the Berlin Museum .
129
139
151
153 154
162
163
. 164
166
168
170
173
174
176
179
33:
34.
35:
36.
37'
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
ILLUSTRATIONS
ΧΧΙΧ
FACING PAGE
Letter from (Apion, now) Antonius Maximus, an Egyptian soldier in the Roman Navy, to his sister Sabina, 2nd cent. A.D. Papyrus from the ee Now in the Berlin Museum .
Letter from a Prodigal Son, Antonis ΤΥ to his mother Nilus, 2nd cent. a.p. Papyrus from the Eee: Now in the Berlin Museum
Letters from Sempronius, an Enyatian, to his mother Saturnila and his brother Maximus, second half of the 2nd cent. a.D. Papyrus from Alexandria (?). Now in the British Museum τ : g 5
Letter from Aurelius Archelaus, beneficiarius, to ‘Julius Domitius, military tribune, lines 1-24, 2nd cent. A.D. Papyrus from Oxyrhynehus. Now in the Bodleian Library, Oxford .
Letter from Harpocras, an Egyptian, to Phthomonthes, 29 December, 192 A.D. Ostracon from Thebes. - Now in the Author’s collection
Letter from Theon, an Fepese ΠΣ to his father Theon, 2nd or 3rd cent. a.D. Papyrus from yn Now in the Bodleian Library, Oxford .
Letter from Pacysis, an Egyptian, to his son, about the 4 .cent. A.D. Ostracon from Thebes. Now in the Author’s collection
Perhaps the Oldest Christian Letter extant in the Ἐν Original. Letter from an Egyptian Christian to his fellow-Christians in the Arsinoite nome. Papyrus, written at Rome between 264 (265) and 282 (281) a.p. Formerly in the possession of the late Lord Amherst of Hackney : ὃ
Letter from Psenosiris, a Christian presbyter, to Apollo, a Christian presbyter at Cysis (Great Oasis). Papyrus, beginning of the 4th cent. a.p. eee Beer Now in the British Museum . :
Letter (with Address) from Justinus, an Ἐκ Christian, to Papnuthius, a Christian. Papyrus, middle of the 4th cent. a.D. Now in the University Library, Heidelberg
Letter from Caor, Papas of Hermupolis, to Flavius Abinnaeus, an officer at Dionysias in the Fayim. Papyrus, circa 346 a.p. Now in the British Museum
Letter from Samuel, Jacob, and Aaron, candidates for the diaconate, to Bishop Abraham of Hermonthis (?). Coptic ostracon, ciyca 600 A.D. (verso). Now in the οὐ μνννωυοι of the Egypt Exploration Fund
Letter probably from Bishop Abraham of Hennonthis (?) to the clergy of his diocese. Coptic ostracon, civca 600 A.D. (verso). Now in the possession of the Egypt Exploration Fund : : ‘ : ᾿ : ὃ :
The first lines of the Epistle to the Romans in a rustic hand. Papyrus from Oxyrhynchus, beginning of the 4th cent. a.p. Now in the Semitic Museum of Harvard University .. .
184
187
193
197
200
201
204
208
214
216
217
222
226
240
ΧΧΧ
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53:
54. 55.
56.
57:
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
ILLUSTRATIONS
FACING PAGE
Marble Inscription from Cos, containing the title Euergetes, ciyca 53 A.D. Nowin Sarrara Yussuf’s garden wall, in the town of Cos. : 3 . : ; i
Folio 33 recto of the Great Magical Papyrus, written in Egypt circa 300 a.p. Now in the Se Nationale at Paris
Folio 33 verso of the Great Magical Papyrus, written in Egypt civca 300 a.D. Now in the Sheers Nationale at Paris.
Report of Judicial Rinse em before the Praefect of — G. Septimius Vegetus, 85 a.p. Papyrus. Nowat Florence
Edict of the Praefect of Egypt, G. Vibius Maximus, 104 A.D. Papyrus (part of a letter er eopy nook): Now in the British Museum
“« Angel” ΠΝ from the Island of Thera. Gravestone, Imperial Period. Now in the Thera Museum ‘
The Zeus-Hermes dedication from Sedasa (Ak-Kilisse), near Lystra, soon after 250 a.D. Now ina house-wall at Baliik- Ἰδοὺ (Balyklagho), near Lystra_.. ῷ ᾧ . :
Epigram on the Tomb of Chrysogonus of Cos. Marble Altar, Imperial Period. Now built into the wall of a house in Cos
Charm for “‘ Binding.” Leaden tablet from Attica, first half of the 4th cent. B.c. : . F ‘ :
Charm for “ Binding. ” Ostracon from Ashmunén, late Imperial Period. Formerly in the possession of the late F, Hilton Price, London : Ἶ .
Marble Pedestal from Pergamum with an Inscription in honour of the Gymnasiarch Apollodorus of Pergamum. Roman Period. Original still at Pergamum . ‘
Marble Tombstone of Otacilia Polla of Pergamum, about the time of Hadrian. Now in the garden of eee Hussein, in the Selinus valley, near Pergamum
Retaining-wall of the Temple of Apollo at Delphi, inscribed with numerous ancient records of manumissions
Lytron (‘ransom ’’) Inscription from Ké6res (Keures), near Koula, in Asia Minor. Imperial Period. Now in the Lyceum Hosianum at Braunsberg . . ;
“Note of Hand for 100 Silver Drachmae, Ist cent. A.D.
Papyrus from-the Fayim. Now in the Berlin Museum
Original Limestone Plate (chavagma) inscribed with the seal of Augustus. Egypt, 5-64.p. Nowin the Berlin Museum
Marble Pedestal from Pergamum with an Inscription in honour of a Priestess of Athene. Imperial Period. Now in the Berlin Museum . ὦ ὃ ‘ ‘ Γ
Marble Pedestal from Pergamum with an Inscription in honour of Augustus. Age of Augustus. Now in the Berlin Museum . . ; ὰ ὡ 3 : ἢ
253
.256
257
269
271
280
281 295
305
306
312
315
321
328 331
341
346
347
65. 66.
67.
ILLUSTRATIONS
Xxxi
FACING PAGE
Marble Slab from Magnesia on the Maeander with a Votive Inscription for Nero, 50-54 a.D. Original at vai cae Plaster Cast in the Berlin Museum ὃ ᾿
Wall of the Propylon of the Temple at El-Khargeh (Great Oasis) inscribed with an Edict of the Praefect Ti. ae Alexander, 6 July, 68 a.p., lines 1-46 ῷ
Ostracon, Thebes. Dated Sebaste Day, 23 September, 33 A.D. Receipt for Embankment and Bath Tax. Now in the Author’s collection ᾿ .
68, 69. Inscription of the Hymnodi of the god Augustus and the
70.
71.
72.
73:
74.
goddess Roma on a marble altar at Pergamum, temp. Hadrian, right side (B, Fig. 68) and left side (D, Fig. μον Now in the courtyard of the Konak at Pergamum .
Block of Blue Limestone from a Pillar of the North Hall of the Market at Priene, with the Calendar Inscription, lines I-31, οἴγοῶ Q B.C. Now in the Berlin Museum .
Block of White Marble from a Pillar of the North Hall of the Market at Priene, with the Calendar Inscription, lines 32-60, civcag B.c. Now in the Berlin Museum
Marble Stele from Cos, Tombstone of Hermes, an Imperial Freedman, after 161 A.D. Now in the house of Said Ali in the town of Cos F : : ᾿ 3
“Onomasticon sacrum. Papyrus from Egypt, 3rd or 4th cent.
A.D. Now in the University Library, Heidelberg
Title-page of the first New Testament Lexicon, by Georg Pasor, Herborn, 1619. From a copy in the Gapped) Library, Heidelberg a
75, 76. Marble Stele from Rheneia, inscribed with a prayer for
77.
78. 79. 8ο.
81.
vengeance on the murderers of Heraclea, a Jewess of Delos, ciyca 100 B.c., front view (A, Fig. 75) ‘and back view (B, Fig. 76). Now in the Museum at Bucharest
Marble Stele from Rheneia, inscribed with a prayer for vengeance on the murderers of Marthina, a Jewess of Delos, ciyca 100 B.c. Now in the National” Museum, Athens : "
Votive Inscription of Gamus and his family to the om Men at Antioch in Pisidia. Imperial Period .
A second Votive Inscription of Gamus and his family to the god Men at Antioch in Pisidia. Imperial Period ἕ
Synagogue situs sea of Theodotus at nai: before 70 A.D. ;
Diptych of M. Valerius Quadratus, a veteran of the ee campaign, Alexandria, 2 July, 94 a.p. Outer Side. Wooden Tablet from Philadelphia in the Fayim. Now in the Museum at Alexandria ὺ
348
358
360
361
366
367
377
405
406
414
415 436 437
440
444
XXXxii ILLUSTRATIONS
82.
FACING PAGE
Diptych of M. Valerius Quadratus, a veteran of the Jerusalem campaign, Alexandria, 2 July, 94 Α.Ὁ., Inner Side. Wooden Tablet from Philadelphia in the Fayim. Now in the Museum at Alexandria ‘ . . .
Epitaph of Regina, a Roman Jewess, in the Catacomb on the Monteverde at Rome, beginning of the 2nd cent.a.p. Now in the Museo Cristiano Lateranense, Rome : ‘
Inscription for the ὡς ἝΞ in the Theatre at Miletus. Imperial Period .
Christian Archangel ἜΜΕΝ in the Theatre at Miletus.
Early Byzantine Period ‘ 3 :
445
448 451
454
CHAPTER I
THE PROBLEM—DISCOVERY AND NATURE OF THE NEW TEXTS’
1. It was beneath an Eastern sky that the gospel was first preached and Jesus Christ was first adored by worshippers as “the Lord.”’ Jesus and Paul were sons of the East. The ‘“‘ Amen” of our daily prayers, the ‘‘ Hosanna” and “ Hallelujah ’’ of our anthems, even names such as “ Christ ”’ and ‘‘ Evangelist’? remind us constantly of the Eastern beginnings of our religious communion. Like other words distinctive of our faith, they are of Semitic and Greek origin. They take us back not only to the soil of Galilee and Judaea but to the international highways of the Greek or rather Graecised Orient: Jesus preaches in His Aramaic mother tongue, Paul speaks the cosmopolitan Greek of the Roman Empire.
So too the book which preserves an echo of the message of Jesus and His apostles: the New Testament is a gift from the East. We are accustomed to read it under our Northern sky, and though it is by origin an Eastern book, it is so essentially a book of humanity that we comprehend its spirit even in the countries of the West and North. But details here and there, and the historical setting, would be better understood by a son of the East, especially a con- temporary of the evangelists and apostles, than by us. Even to-day the traveller who follows the footsteps of the apostle Paul from Corinth past the ruins of Ephesus to Antioch and Jerusalem, finds much revealed to him in the sunshine of the Levant which he would not necessarily have seen at Heidelberg or Cambridge.
In our acts of worship we have, thank God, nothing to do with the historical setting of the sacred text. The great outlines. of the shining golden letters are clearly visible even
2 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
in the semi-darkness of the shrine, and here our business is with things holy, not historical.
But theology, as an historical science, has a vital interest in the discovery of the historical setting, the historical background.
The ancient world, in the widest sense of that term, forms the historical background to Primitive Christianity. It is the one, great, civilised world fringing the Mediterranean, a world which at the period of the new religious departure displayed a more than outward compactness inasmuch as the Hellenisa- tion and Romanisation! of the East and the Orientalisation of the West had worked together for unity.
Any attempt to reconstruct this mighty background to the transformation scene in the world’s. religion will base itself principally on the literatures of that age,—and on the earlier ‘‘ classical’’ literatures in so far as they were forces vital enough to have influenced men’s minds in the Imperial period. There are two groups of records in literary form deserving of special attention : firstly, the remains of Jewish tradition 2 contained in the Mishna, the Talmuds, and kindred texts ; secondly, the Graeco-Roman authors of the Imperial age.
Of neither of these groups, however, shall I speak here, although I am not unaware of the great importance of this body of literary evidence. It were indeed a task well worthy of a scholar to devote his life to producing a new edition of Johann Jakob Wettstein’s New Testament.? That splendid book is a century and a half old, and its copious collection of parallels from Jewish and Graeco-
1 A problem that received little attention before it was treated by Ludwig Hahn, Rom und Romanismus im griechisch-rémischen Osten, Leipzig, 1907.
2 I expressly refrain from saying litevature, for it is a significant fact that Jewish tradition was at first non-literary, and only became literary after- wards. The writings of Ludwig Blau are especially instructive on this point, which finds its most important analogy in Primitive Christianity.
3 Novum Testamentum Graecum cum lectionibus variantibus et commentario pleniove opera Jo. Jac. Wetstenit, Amstelaedami, 1751-2, 2 vols. folio. Dedi- cated to Frederick, Prince of Wales, son of George II. Contains prolegomena, apparatus criticus, and commentary. £.g. Matt. ix. 12, ‘they that be whole need not a physician,” is illustrated by quotations from Ovid, Diogenes Laertius, Pausanias, Stobaeus, Dio Chrysostom, Artemidorus, Plato, Quin- tilian, Seneca, and Plutarch: There are appendices on the use of variants
and on interpretation (especially of the Apocalypse) ; a list of authors quoted; a Greek index verborum; and, to crown the feast, the Syriac text of the
Epistles of Clement is given. (TR.)
THE PROBLEM 3
Roman writers could be supplemented from our present stores of scientific antiquarian lore: it was one of the dreams of my student days at Marburg, and Georg Heinrici has begun to carry the plan into execution.1_ But on the whole the ancient Jewish texts at the present time are being explored by so many theologians, both Jewish and Christian, —the Christian with fewer prejudices than formerly, and the Jewish more methodically,—and on the whole the Graeco-Roman literature of the Imperial period has attracted so many industrious workers, that we are already familiar with a wide extent of the litevary background of Primitive Christianity. Indeed, the literary memorials are valued so highly that in some quarters it is consciously or uncon- sciously believed that the literature of the Imperial period will enable us to restore the historical background of Primitive Christianity in its entirety.
Those who think so forget that the literature, even if we now possessed the whole of it, is after all only a fragment of the ancient world, though an important fragment. They forget that a reconstruction of the ancient world is bound to be imperfect if founded solely on the literary texts, and that comparisons between Primitive Christianity and this world, which has been pieced together fragmentarily out of frag- ments, might easily prove erroneous.” Even so brilliant and learned a scholar as Eduard Norden? in criticising Primitive Christianity in its linguistic and literary aspects, insisted
1 The Institute for the Historical Study of Religion (Religionsgeschichtliches Forschungsinstitut), founded at Leipzig University with Heinrici as Director, had appointed a committee for this work, consisting of A. Deissmann, E. von Dobschiitz, H. Lietzmann, H. Windisch, and G. Heinrici (Chairman), and a certain amount of preliminary work was accomplished. The war and the economic catastrophes of the post-war period seriously hindered the under- taking; it was resumed, however, in 1921. In November 1921 it was. dis- covered that the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (London) was also planning a ‘‘ revised Wettstein:” Difficulties, however, beset its path; the material already collected in England has therefore, by a happy arrange- ment, been made accessible to the German revisers. The management is now in the hands of E. von Dobschiitz. See an article by him in the Zeitschr. f. Neutestamentliche Wissenschaft 21 (1922) p. 146 ff.
2 See some excellent remarks by Baldensperger in the Theologische Lite- raturzeitung 38 (1913) col. 392.
3 Die antike Kunstprosa vom VI. Jahrhundert v. Chr. bis in die Zeit der
Renaissance, Leipzig, 1898. See my review of this book in Theol. Rundschau 5 (1902) p. 66 ff.
4 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
upon contrasts between St. Paul and the ancient world which in reality are mere contrasts between artless non-literary prose and the artistic prose of literature. Such contrasts are quite unconnected with the opposition in which Primitive Christianity stood to the ancient world. The whole of the learned discussion about the ‘‘ Greek ’’ or “ non-Greek ”’ character of certain New Testament passages in regard to language or content still suffers considerably from the vagueness of the concept “ Greek ’’ which the adherents of either side have in view. If you make the Greek world end, roughly speaking, with Alexander—if you think that in the classical literature you possess the documents of Greek culture as a finished product, your standard will be altogether different from that of the man who says the Greek “‘ world ”’ really begins with Alexander, and who sees in the Greek world- language not an artificial contamination, but a living struc- ture, organically connected with the spoken language of the classical period, greatly and artificially conventionalised though that was in the classical literature. The struggle of this second school against the first may be termed modern anti-Atticism, and the modern Atticists, like those of the Imperial period, often conduct their defence with appreci- ations which, creditable as they sometimes are to the taste and good will of their originators, are a dogmatisation of history.
As an attempt to fill in some gaps in the historical back- ground of Primitive Christianity, and as an antidote to extreme views concerning the value of the literary memorials, the following pages are offered to the reader. I propose to show the importance of the non-literary written memorials of the Roman Empire in the period which led up to and witnessed the rise and early development of Christianity, the period, let us say, from Alexander to Diocletian or Con- stantine. I refer to the innumerable texts on stone, metal, wax, papyrus, parchment, wood, or earthenware, now made accessible to us by archaeological discovery and research. They were the gift chiefly of the nineteenth century, which we might almost describe as the century of epigraphical archaeology !; but their importance for the
1 General readers as well as specialists will appreciate the review of the century’s work (restricted, however, to the archaeology of art) in Adolf
Επα. 1.—A Quirinius Inscription from Antioch in Pisidia: Base of a Statue of C. Caristanius, Praefect of the Governor P. Sulpicius Quirinius; possibly dating from the first Syrian governorship of Quirinius (11-8 B.c.?). By permission of Sir William M, Ramsay.
THE PROBLEM 5
historical understanding of Primitive Christianity 15’ 5111 far from being generally recognised, and it will be much longer before they are fully exhausted.
How different it has been with the cuneiform inscriptions of the East and ¢heiry application to Old Testament study ! Men who knew much about the Bible,-but nothing of cunei- form, entered into competition with cuneiform specialists, to whom the Bible had not revealed its mysteries, and an immense literature informed the world of the gradual rise of the edifice behind the scaffolding amid the dust and din of the Babylonian building-plot. It was spoken of in the wardrooms of our men-of-war and in the crowded debating halls of the trade unions.
It cannot be said that New Testament scholarship has hitherto profited on the same scale by the new discoveries. The relics of antiquity found in Mediterranean lands are able to throw light on the New Testament, but their value is not so obvious as that of the cuneiform inscriptions for the Old Testament, and can certainly not be made clear to every layman in a few minutes. No tablets have yet been found to enable us to date exactly the years of office of the Procurators Felix and Festus,! which would solve an
Michaelis, Die avchdologischen Entdeckungen des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts, Leipzig, 1906; 2nd ed.'1908, under the title Ein Jahrhundert kunstarchdolo- gischer Entdeckungen (English translation, A Century of Archaeological Dis- coveries, London, 1908. TR.]. Brief and full of matter is Theodor Wiegand’s Untergang und Wiedergewinnung dey Denkmdler, offprint from H. Bulle’s Handbuch dev Archdologie, Minchen, 1913.
1 As late as 1910, in the last edition of this book, I here added “ or of the Proconsul Gallio.’”’ A stone inscribed with the name of Gallio had, however, been found at Delphi before that, and is of considerable assistance to us, though it does not furnish an absolutely certain chronology for Gallio. Details in the appendix to my Paulus, Tibingen, 1911, p. 159 ff.; St. Paul, London, 1912, p. 235 ff. The literature dealing with the stone has since then greatly increased, cf. Paulus,? 1925, Ὁ. 203 ff.; Paul,? 1926, p. 261 ff. A squeeze of the inscription is in the New Testament Seminar of the University of Berlin. New fragments of the stone in D. Plooij, De Chronologie van het Leven van Paulus, Leiden, 1918.—On another inscription, also very important, which establishes the identity of Lysanias, the tetrarch of Abilene, mentioned in Luke iii. 1, cf. F. Bleckmann, Zeitschrift des Deutschen Paldstina-Vereins 36 (1913), p. 220. Part of it was already known, and had been quoted in the earlier editions of this work (cf. Index I, Places, 5.0. “ Abila’’). Cf. also (Figure 1) one of the two extremely valuable Quirinius inscriptions from Antioch in Pisidia (Sir William M. Ramsay, The Bearing of Recent Discovery on the Trust-
~
6 ’ LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
important problem of early Christian history, and Christian inscriptions and papyri of the very earliest period are at present altogether wanting! And yet the discoveries made by our diggers of archaeological treasure in Greece, Asia Minor, Syria, Palestine, and Egypt are of very great import- ance indeed for the light they throw on the earliest stages of Christianity.
worthiness of the New Testament, London, 1915, p. 285, plate I). There, in line 6, Quirinius is named as duumvir of Antioch :
P. Sulpict Quirini duumov(ivi).
The other Quirinius inscription ibid., p. 290 ff. On both cf. also F. Bleck- mann, Die erste syrische Statthalterschaft des P. Sulpicius Quirinius, Klio 17 (Leipzig, 1920) p. 104 ff., and H. Dessau, Zu den neuen Inschriften des Sulpicius Quirinius, Klio 17 (1920) p. 252 ff. These inscriptions put the time of the first Syrian governorship of Quirinius considerably further back; hitherto it used to be placed in the years 3-2 B.c., now it is perhaps to be dated 11-8 B.c. Important for Luke ii. 1 f. and the chronology of the birth of Jesus. [See W. M. Calder, ‘“‘The Date of the Nativity,” Discovery 1 (April, 1920), pp. 00-103, concluding 8 B.c. to be the most probable. The same writer points out, Classical Review 38 (Feb.-March, 1924), p. 30, that the question of the bearing of the Quirinius inscriptions on Luke’s chronology is still sub judice. If Dessau’s dating is correct these inscriptions cease to have any bearing on the date of Quirinius’ first governorship of Syria. The argument would have to fall back on the Egyptian census papers and on the dated Augustan milestones of the Pisidian military. roads. One of the milestones (Figure 2),.which St. Paul certainly saw with his own eyes, still stands (at Yonuslar) where he passed it on his way to Iconium from Antioch. Professor Calder, who kindly supplied the photograph of this tough milestone, wrote in The Morning Post, 17 April, 1925 (previous articles 30 Jan., 14 April) that the stone now stands upside down, with the name of the first Roman ~ Emperor lapped in earth. ‘‘The Hodja told us why. The villagers had decided, a dozen years ago, to use it as a pillar to support the roof of the mosque. Before it had been carried twenty yards (the Hodja pointed to the exact spot) it broke two ox-carts. They let it lie, and then several villagers died. So they took it for a ‘sign’ (keramét), carried the stone back, and set it up where it had always stood. Upside down, it was true, but Allah knew that they had done their best.” TR.)
1 Why they are wanting is a question that has often engaged my thoughts. First of all it may be said that a large part of the ground on which the history of the apostolic age took place has not yet been explored. Secondly, however, —and this assumption follows from my whole conception of Primitive Chris- tianity—the early Christian epitaphs, for example, would be scanty in com- parison with the total number of contemporary texts, and would be inscribed on poor and easily perishable material. It would seem that graffiti on ossuaries might have been preserved more easily in Palestine than elsewhere, if we may draw conclusions from the Jewish ossuaries of Palestine, which deserve a special investigation without delay. Early Christian papyri are not likely to be found there owing to the unfavourable nature of the climate; but see below, pp. 32-36.
“(F261 Jo JoWUINS) PIOJXO ‘a8aqjop formed JO ‘xoD Ἵ “Δ Ὁ Aq ydes80j0yd 8 wory “A}IANEN 912 10} ‘O'a 9. 0} 95010 a}ep 8 10 Διοτίμα τοῦ st Wt “Oa 9 pozeq ‘[sniutmm() jo usredures read-om} 9112 Aq} ΒΠ1ΠΈ5] pue eIpIstg jo uotzeoyioed 911 Suryreur 591195 & JO JUG = ‘WINIUODT 0} peor oy} UO seqeuIeg pue [neg Aq passed ‘1e[snUuO,x 18 ΘΙΙΟΊΘΘΙΠΛ URWIOY—'z 910]
THE PROBLEM 7
It is not merely that the systematic study of the new texts increases the amount of authentic first-hand evidence relating to the Imperial period. The point is that the literary memorials are supplemented by an entirely new group, with quite a new bearing on history.
In the literary memorials that have come down to us, what we have is practically the evidence of the upper, culti- vated classes about themselves. The lower classes are seldom allowed to speak, and where they do come to the front—in the comedies, for instance—they stand before us for the most part in the light thrown upon them from above. The old Jewish tradition, coming down to us by a literary channel, has, it is true, preserved along with its superabundance of learned dogma. much that belongs to the people—the Rabbinic texts are a mine of information to the folklorist—yet it may be said of the accessible fragment of the Graeco-Roman literature of the Imperial age, that it is on the whole, since the vulgar literature of those days is as good as lost to us, the reflection of the dominant classes, possessed of power and culture; and these upper classes have been almost always taken as identical with the whole ancient world of the Imperial age. Compared with Primi- tive Christianity, advancing like the under-current of a lava stream with irresistible force from its source in the East, this upper stratum appears cold, exhausted, lifeless. Senility, the feature common to upper classes everywhere, was held to be the characteristic of the whole age which witnessed the new departure in religion, and thus we have the origin of the gloomy picture that people are still fond of drawing as soon as they attempt to sketch for us the background of Christianity in its early days.
This fatal generalisation involves of course a great mistake. The upper classes have been simply confused with the whole body of society, or, to employ another expression, Primitive Christianity has been compared with an incommensurable quantity. By its social structure Primitive Christianity points unequivocally to the lower and middle classes.1_ Its
1 This sentence, of which the whole of this book is an illustration, forms the subject of an address by me at the nineteenth Evangelical and Social Congress, held at Dessau, on “" Primitive Christianity and the Lower Classes,” printed together with the lively discussion that followed in the Proceedings
8 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
connexions with the upper classes are very scanty at the outset. Jesus of Nazareth was a carpenter, Paul of Tarsus a tentmaker, and the tentmaker’s words! about the origin of his churches in the lower classes of the great towns form one of the most important testimonies, historically speaking, that Primitive Christianity gives of itself. Primitive Chris- tianity is another instance of the truth taught us with each return of springtime, that the sap rises upward from below.
of the Congress, Géttingen, 1908; and in a second (separate) edition, Gét- tingen, 1908. An English translation appeared in The Expositor, February, March, and April 1909.—I am well aware that it is difficult in many cases to prove the division-into classes, the boundaries between ‘‘ upper classes ”’ and ‘lower classes’”’ being often shifting. The speakers in the discussion at Dessau had much to say of importance on this head, and several reviewers of this book have discussed the point. I would refer particularly to Paul Wendland’s review in the Deutsche Literaturzeitung 29 (1908) col. 3146 f. The discussion between Max Maurenbrecher and Adolf Harnack in Die Hilfe 16 (1910) Nos. 25, 26, 27 is very instructive. To make a catchword of the “ proletarian ’’ character of Primitive Christianity seems to me, however, to add to the difficulty of an understanding. For Harnack’s position cf. also his book, Die Mission und Ausbreitung des Christentums in den ersten dret Jahvhunderten,® Leipzig, 1915, ¢.g., II. p. 30 ff. [English translation by James Moffatt, London, 1908, II.2 p. 33 ff.]; my hints in my ‘“ Evangelischer Wochenbrief ” III., No. 63/68, early April 1921 (the “‘ clever Balt ’ quoted there [p. 186; the Balts are persons of German descent born in the Baltic provinces of Russia, now the republics of Esthonia and Latvia. Tr.] is Reinhold Seeberg, Velhagen and Klasing’s Monatshefte 30 [1915-16] p. 227); and a significant postcard from Harnack, 4 May [ΟΖῚ, in “ Ev. Wochenbrief’’ III., 69/78, early June 1921, p.210f. Further: Karl Dieterich, Die Grenzboten, 9 Dec., 1909. The criticism I received from G. A. van den Bergh van Eysinga, Kautsky’s opvatting van het oudste Christendom aan de bronnen getoetst, Baarn, 1911, must not be overlooked. Friedrich Naumann, Briefe δεν Religion. Mit Nachwovrt ‘‘ Nach 13 Jahven,’’ Berlin, 1916, p. 103 f., had understood me well. Important from the point. of view of method: Richard Reitzenstein, Historia Monachorum und Historia Lausiaca, Gottingen, 1916, p. 215 ff.—The problem of class division has deeply engaged my attention and I think it is to the good of the cause if I now, in order to avoid the appearance of a mechanical separation, speak more of “‘ upper classes ” and ‘lower classes’ in the plural, and expressly emphasise the fact that the characteristics of various social classes can be blended in an individual.— There is much that is stimulating with regard to method in the brief lecture by Friedrich v. der Leyen, Die deutsche Volkskunde und der deutsche Unterricht, Berlin, 1916. ,
1χ Cor, i. 26-31. With this compare the humble inscription from the synagogue at Corinth (Figure 3, p. 16 below), perhaps the very synagogue in which St. Paul first preached at Corinth. Excellent remarks by Georg Heinrici, Paulus als Seelsorger, Gross-Lichterfelde-Berlin, 1910, p. 10 f. For the later period Hugo Koch (postcard, Munich, 19 Nov., 1012). refers to Victor Schulze, Geschichte des Untergangs des griechisch-rémischen Heidentums, Jena, 1892, II. p. 339.
THE PROBLEM 9
Primitive Christianity stood in natural opposition to the high culture of the ancient world, not so much because it was Christianity, but because it was a movement of the lower classes. The only comparison possible, therefore, is that between the Christians and the corresponding spiritual province among the pagans, 7.6. the masses of the ancient world.
Until recently these masses were almost entirely lost to the historian. Now, however, thanks to the discovery of their own authentic records, they have suddenly risen again from the rubbish mounds of the ancient cities, little market towns, and villages. They plead so insistently to be heard ‘that there is nothing for it but to yield them calm and dis- passionate audience. The chief and most general value of the non-literary written memorials of the Roman Empire, I think, is this: They help us to correct the picture of the ancient world which we have formed by viewing it, hitherto, exclusively from above. They place us in the midst of the classes in which we have to think of the apostle Paul and the early Christians gathering recruits. This statement, however, must not be pressed. Of course among the inscriptions and papyri of that time there are very many (a majority in fact of the inscriptions) that do not come from the lower classes but owe their origin to Caesars, generals, statesmen, municipalities, and rich people.1 But side. by side with these texts, particularly in the papyri and ostraca, lies evidence of the middle and lower classes, in countless depositions made by themselves, and in most cases recognisable at once as such by their contents or the peculiarity of their language. These are records of the people’s speech, records of the insignificant affairs of insig- nificant persons. Peasants and artisans, soldiers and slaves and mothers belonging to the common people speak to us of their cares and labours. The unknown and the forgotten, for whom there was no room in the pages of the annals,
1 Even these, however, especially the municipal documents of the Imperial period, are, at least linguistically, representative not of the higher but of an average culture.—There is a fine appreciation of the discoveries of literary papyri as a reflex of the culture of hellenised Egypt by Wilhelm Schubart, “Papyrusfunde und _ griechische Literatur,” Internationale Monatsschrift fiir Wissenschaft, Kunst und Technik 8 (1914) Nos. 10 and 11.
10 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
troop into the lofty halls of our museums, and in the libraries, volume on volume, are ranged the precious editions of the new texts.
In several ways these texts yield a respectable harvest to the student of the New Testament.1 I am not thinking now of the additions to our store of New Testament and other early Christian MSS. by the discovery of early Christian papyrus and parchment fragments, and ostraca, although. in this direct way the value of the new documents is con- siderable. I mean rather the indirect value which the non-Christian, non-literary texts possess for the student of Primitive Christianity. This is of three kinds:
(1) They teach us to put a right estimate philologically upon the New Testament and, with it, Primitive Christianity.
(2) They point to the right literary appreciation of the New Testament.
(3) They give us important information on points in the history of religion and culture, helping us to understand both the contact and the contrast between Primitive Christianity and the ancient world.?
For the purposes of this work I have tacitly excluded one group of memorials. I shall in the main deal only with Greek and Latin texts and neglect those in other languages. I could not claim to speak as a specialist with regard to
1 The importance of the texts for Rabbinic studies furnishes a good parallel ; cf. Ludwig Blau, Papyri und Talmud in gegenseitiger Beleuchtung, Leipzig, 1913.
2 There are now a number of recent works addressing themselves to these three tasks, either dealing with the methodological problem, or offering new material, or combining together old and new: Erik Aurelius, Till belysning af kulturforhallandena pa urkristendomes tid, Bibelforskaren, 1908, p. 387 ff.: Hans Windisch, ‘“‘ Das Neue Testament im Lichte der neugefundenen Inschrif- ten, Papyri und Ostraka,’’ Neue Jahrbiicher fiir das klassische Altertum, etc., I. Abt., 25 (1910) pp. 201-222; Ernesto Buonaiuti, Saggi di Filologia e Storia del Nuovo Testamento, Roma, 910 (on the fortunes of this book cf. the Chronik der Christlichen Welt, ro11, 5. 416; W. Frommberger, “ Die unliterarischen Funde aus hellenistischer Zeit in ihrer Bedeutung fir die altchristliche Forschung,” in Studien des Wissenschaftlichen Theologischen - Vereins (for Dean Ὁ. Decke), Breslau, 1913, p. 53 ff.; S. Angus, The Envivon- ment of Early Christianity, London, 1914; Sir W. M. Ramsay, The Beaving ᾿ of Recent Discovery on the Tvustworthiness of the New Testament, London, 1915; Camden M. Cobern, The New Archeological Discoveries and their Bearing upon the New' Testament and upon the Life and Times of the Primitive Church,
New York and London, 1917; cf. also Friedrich Pfister, Zeitschrift fiir fran- zésische Sprache und Literatur, 43 (1914) p. 2.
THE PROBLEM II
all of them, and moreover the sheer bulk of the Greek and Latin texts makes it necessary to fix bounds somewhere. I desire, however, to call special attention to at least one group, of the utmost importance particularly in the history of religion. The Semitic inscriptions, found in such numbers in the province of Syria and the border-lands to the East and North, enable us to reconstruct at least fragments of hitherto almost unknown heathen cults that were practised in the original home of Christianity.!
2. It will be our business to discuss the new texts in the light of linguistic, literary, and religious history; but before we address ourselves to this triple task it is necessary that the texts themselves should be briefly described.?
We divide them according to the material on which they are written into three main groups. This method of division is mechanical, but is recommended by the simple fact that the texts are generally published in separate editions according to the material they are written on. We shall speak in turn οἵ:
(a) Inscriptions on stone, metal, etc.,
(6) Texts on papyrus (and parchment),
(c) Texts on potsherds.
(a) The bulk of the INscRIPTIONS 3. are on stone, but to these must be added inscriptions cast and engraved in -bronze or scratched on tablets of lead or gold, a few wax tablets, the scribblings (grafiti) found on walls, and the
1 A most promising beginning in turning the inscriptions and sculpture to account in the history of religion has been made by René Dussaud, Notes de Mythologie Syrienne, Paris, 1903 and 1905. Cf. Count Wolf Baudissin, Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 31 (1906) col. 294 ff—How far this research has advanced since then is shown by Franz Cumont, Les religions orientales dans le paganisme yomain, Paris, 1906,.*1909; The Oriental Religions in Roman Paganism, Chicago, 1911, ch. 5; Count W. W. Baudissin, Adonis und Esmun, Leipzig, 1g11; and Ditlef Nielsen, Der Dreieinige Gott, vol. I, Copenhagen and Berlin, 1922. ὃ
2 Of course no attempt is made here δὲ exhaustiveness of statement.
8 To the layman needing a first introduction to Greek epigraphy, Walther Janell, Ausgewahlte Inschriften griechisch und deutsch, Berlin, 1906, may be recommended. It is only to be regretted that the translations often modernise the originals far more than is necessary. As an introduction to independent research: Wilhelm Larfeld, Griechische Epigrvaphik®, Munich, 1914 (Hand- buch der klassischen Altertumswissenschaft I. 5).
12 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
texts on coins and medals. These inscriptions, of which there are hundreds of thousands, are discovered on the site of the ancient civilised settlements of the Graeco-Roman world in its fullest extent, from the Rhine to the upper course of the Nile, and from the Euphrates to Britain. Inscriptions had been noted and studied in antiquity itself, in the Middle Ages, and in the days of the Renaissance,} and in the eighteenth century there was one scholar, Johann Walch,? who pressed Greek inscriptions into the service of New Testament exegesis. But the nineteenth century is the first that really deserves to be called the age of
-epigraphy.
Two names stand forth before all others as personifying epigraphical studies: August Béckh will always be associ-— ated with the Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum, and Theodor Mommsen with the Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum, The great collection of Greek inscriptions has long ceased to be up to date, and is gradually being replaced by newer publications,’ but it was this first great attempt to collect all the material that alone enabled Greek epigraphy to develop so brilliantly as it has done. Great societies as well as
1 For the early history of Greek epigraphy see S. Chabert, Revue Archéo- logique, quatr. série, t. 5 (1905) p. 274 ff. Further cf. Larfeld, Griech. Epigraphik 3. ᾿
2. Joh. Ernst Imm. Walch, Observationes in Matthaeum ex graecis inscrip- tionibus, Jena, 1779. This book is undoubtedly one of the best examples of the many valuable “ Observations ’’ which that age produced, and from which almost the whole of the philological matter in our New Testament commentaries and lexicons is derived. Paul Jirges (postcard, Wiesbaden, 2 Oct., 1914) refers me to Fried. Minter, Observationum ex marmoribus graects sacrarum specimen, Hafniae 1814. The author, who died in 1830 (Lutheran) Bishop of Seeland, also uses inscriptions to explain the N.T. (cf. Larfeld 3, Pp. 27). He is one of the series of “ epigraphic bishops,”’ the most epigraphic of whom, according to Hiller von Gaertringen, was E. L. Hicks [the late Bishop of Lincoln, 1843~1920]. Their patron saint is St. Paul of the Areopagus.
® The first new Corpus was the Corpus Inscriptionum Altticarum. The volumes have been numbered on a uniform plan so as to fit in with later Corpora of Greek inscriptions in Europe still in course of publication (U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff in the Sitzungsberichte der Kgl. Preuss. Akademie der Wissenschaften, 25 June 1903). The comprehensive title of the new Corpora is Inscriptiones Graecae editae consilio et auctoritate Academiae Regiae Borussicae (abbreviated I. G.). An admirable guide to these publica- tions is Baron F. Hiller von Gaertringen, Stand der griechischen Inschriften- corpora, Beitrage zur Alten Geschichte [Klio] 4 (1904) p. 252 ff.
THE PROBLEM 13
independent archaeologists have added to the total number of inscriptions known by carrying on systematic excavations, typical examples being the work of the Germans at Olympia and of the French at Delphi. New Testament scholars will follow with interested eyes the discoveries made in recent years by the English and Austrians on the site of ancient Ephesus,! by British investigators in Asia Minor in general,? by the Germans at Pergamum,? Magnesia on the Maeander,* Priene,® Miletus,* and other places in Asia
1 J. T. Wood, Discoveries at Ephesus, London, 1877; The Collection of Ancient Greek Inscriptions tn the British Museum, edited by Sir C. T. Newton : Part III. Priene, Iasos and Ephesos, by E. L. Hicks, Oxford, 1890 (cf. n. 2 below). The provisional reports of the Austrians in the Beiblatt der Jahres- hefte des Osterreichischen Archaeologischen Institutes in Wien, 1898 ff., are being brought together and supplemented in the monumental Forschungen in Ephesos veroffentlicht vom Osterreichischen Archaeologischen Institute, the first volume of which appeared at Vienna, 1906, with prominent contributions from Otto Benndorf, and under his auspices. Vol. II came out in 1912, Vol. IIT in 1923.
2 I will only mention here,: since it appeals particularly to theological students, the great work done by Sir William M. Ramsay and his pupils; cf. for instance Studies in the History and Art of the Eastern Provinces of the Roman Empire, Aberdeen, 1906, published in celebration of the Quater- centenary of the University of Aberdeen, and valuable as a contribution to early Church History. The name of Ramsay will always remain specially connected with the exploration of the ancient Christian cities of Asia Minor; from them he has gathered and published an extraordinarily rich collection of inscriptions.—A valuable gift of the war years is The Collection of Ancient Greek Inscriptions in the British Museum, Part IV., Section II., Oxford, 1916, edited by F. H. Marshall (cf. Hiller von Gaertringen, Berliner Philologische Wochenschrift 1916 col. 1385 ff.), concluding this great publication (already mentioned, n. 1 above). A survey of the contents of the whole work will be found in Larfeld ὅ, p. 64.
8 K6nigliche Museen zu Berlin, Alterttimey von Pergamon herausgegeben im Auftrage des K6niglich Preussischen Ministers der geistlichen, Unterrichts- und Medicinal-Angelegenheiten, Vol. VIII.: Die Inschviften von Pergamon unter Mitwirkung von Ernst Fabricius und Carl Schuchhardt herausgegeben von Max Frankel, 1. Bis zum Ende dey Kénigszeit, Berlin, 1890; 2. Rémische Zeit.—Inschriften auf Thon, Berlin, 1895.—Recent finds are generally pub- lished in the Mitteilungen des Kaiserlich Deutschen Archaeologischen Instituts, Athenische Abteilung (Athenische Mitteilungen). Besides the great German work on Pergamum there has appeared : Pergame, Restauration et Description des Monuments de l’Acvopole. Restauration par Emmanuel Pontremoli. Texte par Maxime Collignon, Paris, 1900.
4 K6nigliche Museen zu Berlin, Die Inschriften von Magnesia am Maeander herausgegeben von Otto Kern, Berlin, 1890.
5 K6nigliche Museen zu Berlin, Priene. Ergebnisse dey Ausgrabungen und Untersuchungen in den Jahven 1895-1898 von Theodor Wiegand und Hans Schrader unter Mitwirkung von G. Kummer, W. Wilberg, H. Winnefeld,
[For continuation of notes see next page.
“αὶ
14 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Minor,! in Thera,” Cos,? and other. islands, and in Syria and Arabia,‘ by the French in Macedonia,’ at Didyma,® Delphi
1 I would mention specially: Karl Buresch, Aus Lydien, epigraphisch- geographische Reisefriichte herausg. von Otto Ribbeck, Leipzig, 1898; Aler- tiimer von Hievapolis herausgegeben von Carl Humann, Conrad Cichorius, Walther Judeich, Franz Winter, Berlin, 1898 (Jahrbuch des Kais. Deutschen Archdologischen Instituts IV. Erganzungsheft); the inscriptions, pp. 67-180, are dealt with by Walther Judeich. Other epigraphical material in plenty will be found in the serial publications in the Athenische Mitteilungen and the various special journals.
3 Cf. the great work on Thera by Baron F. Hiller von Gaertringen, Berlin, 1899 ff., and the same scholar’s edition of the inscriptions from Thera in I.G. (cf. above, p. 12, ἢ. 3) Vol. XII. fasc. III., Berlin, 1898.
8 Rudolf Herzog, Kotsche Forschungen und Funde, Leipzig, 1899. The foundation was laid by W. R. Paton and E. L. Hicks, The Inscriptions of Cos, Oxford, 1891.
4 Karl Humann and Otto Puchstein, Reisen in Kleinasien und Nordsyrien . . . (text with atlas), Berlin, 1890; Rudolf Ernst Briinnow and Alfred von Domaszewski, Die Provincia Avabia . .., 3 vols., Strassburg, 1904,. 1905, 1909. To these was added during the Great War the work of German scholars for the protection of ancient monuments that were exposed to special risks in the fighting areas; cf. the reports by Paul Clemen, Hans Dragendorff (Macedonia), Georg Karo (Western Asia Minor), Theodor Wiegand (Syria, Palestine, and Western Arabia), and Friedrich Sarre (Mesopotamia, Eastern Anatolia, Persia, and Afghanistan), Zeitschrift fir bildende Kunst, New Series 54 (1918-19) pp. 257-304 (repeated in Vol. II. of the great work, Kunstschutz im Kriege, Leipzig, 1919). The work of the Turco-German Detachment for the Protection of Ancient Monuments under the direction
[For continuation of notes see next page.
Continuation of notes to p. 13:— R. Zahn, Berlin, 1904.—Inschriften von Priene unter Mitwirkung von Ὁ. Fredrich, H. von Prott, H. Schrader, Th. Wiegand und H. Winnefeld heraus- gegeben von F. Frhr. Hiller von Gaertringen, Berlin, 1906. Cf. A. Wilhelm, Wiener Studien 29 (1908) pp. 1-25.
® Of the great work on Miletus four instalments have so far appeared (Mtlet. Ergebnisse der Ausgrabungen und Untersuchungen seit dem Jahre 1899 : Heft 1, Karte dey Milesischen Halbinsel, 1 : 50,000, mit erlauterndem Text von Paul Wilski, Berlin, 1906; Heft 2, Das Rathaus von Milet von Hubert Knackfuss mit Beitragen von Carl Fredrich, Theodor Wiegand, Hermann Winnefeld, Berlin, 1908; Heft 3, Das Delphinion in Milet von Georg Kawerau und Albert Rehm unter Mitwirkung von Friedrich Freiherr Hiller von Gaer- tringen, Mark Lidzbarski, Theodor Wiegand, Erich Ziebarth, Berlin, 1914; Heft 4, Dey Poseidonaltay bei Kap Monodendri von Armin von Gerkan, Berlin, 1915. Cf. also the provisional reports by R. Kekule von Stradonitz (I.) and Theodor Wiegand (II.-V.) in the Sitzungsberichte der Kgl. Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, 1900, 1901, 1904, 1905, 1906, and by Theodor Wiegand in the Archdologischer Anzeiger, 1901, 1902, 1904, and 1906. Reports Nos. VI. and VII. (on Miletus and Didyma) by Wiegand appeared in the appendix to the Abhandlungen der Kgl. Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften vom Jahre 1908, ΙΟΙΙ.
THE PROBLEM 15
and in Πεῖοβ, by the Russians on the north coast of the Black Sea,? by the Belgians also on the Pontus Euxinus,? by the Americans in Asia Minor‘ (of late particularly at Sardis 5), in Syria® and at Corinth.? There are moreover
1 Cf. chiefly the provisional publications in the Bulletin de Correspondance Hellénique. In 1910 began the great French publication relating to Delos: Exploration archéologique de Délos faite par l’Ecole francaise d’Athénes .. . sous la direction de Th. Homolle et M. Holleaux, fasc. 1, 2, Paris, 1910; fasc. 3, 1911. The inscriptions of Delos (with those of Myconos and Rheneia) were to have been published by the Paris Academy as Vol. XI. of the Berlin Inscriptiones Graecae (and those of Delphi as Vol. VIII.). Two important inscriptions from the island-cemetery of the Delians, which throw light on the history of the Septuagint and the Jewish Diaspora, are discussed in my essay on ‘‘ Die Rachegebete von Rheneia,” Philologus 61 (1902) pp. 253-265, reprinted as an appendix (No. I.) to the present work.
2 The chief publication is the great collection, Imscriptiones Antiquae Ovae Septentrionalis Ponti Euxini Graecae et Latinae, ed. Basilius Latyschev, St. Petersburg, 1885-1901.
8 Recueil des Inscriptions Grecques et Latines du Pont et de Τ᾿ Arménte publigées par J. G. C. Anderson, Franz Cumont, Henri Grégoire, Fasc. 1, Bruxelles, 1910.
4 Cf. especially Vols. 2 and 3 of the Papers of the American School of Classical Studies at Athens, Boston, 1888, with reports of two epigraphical expeditions in Asia Minor by J. R. Sitlington Sterrett.
5 Under the direction of Howard Crosby Butler since 1910, cf. Cobern, Ῥ. 565 ff.; reports in the American Journal of Archaeology, 2nd Series, from vol. 14 onwards (1910 ff.), containing many inscriptions.
6 There are two great archaeological series: Publications of an American Archaeological Expedition in Syria in 1899-1900 (including Vol. IJI.: Greek
: {For continuation of notes see next page.
Continuation of notes to p. 14 :—
of Theodor Wiegand has already led to a great series of ‘‘ Wissenschaftliche Veréffentlichungen ’’: Heft 1, Sinai von Th. Wiegand, Berlin, 1920 (cf. my Evangelischer Wochenbrief III., No. 47/55, late January 1921, pp. 144-147); Heft 2, Die griechischen Inschriften der Palaestina Tertia westlich dey ‘Avaba von A. Alt, 1921; Heft 3, Petra von W. Bachmann, C. Watzinger, Th. Wiegand, K. Wulzinger; 1921; Heft 4, Damaskus. Die antike Stadt von Carl Watzinger und Karl Wulzinger, 1921; Heft 6, Dte’Denkmdler u. In- schviften an der Miindung des Nahr el-Kelb von F. H. Weissbach, 1922. Heft 5 will deal with Mohammedan Damascus. These are supplemented by the splendid illustrated work, Alte Denkmdler aus Syrien, Paldstina und Westarabien, 100 plates with text, edited by Th. Wiegand, Berlin, 1918.
5 L, Heuzey and H. Daumet, Mission aychéologique de Macédoine, Paris, 1864-1877.
ὃ E, Pontremoli and B. Haussoullier, Didymes, Foutiles de 1895 et 1896, Paris, 1904. For the inscriptions see the provisional publications in the Bulletin de Correspondance Hellénique. Felix Sarteaux, Villes mortes d' Aste Mineure, 1916, I know only from Cobern, p. 563. The first account of the new German excavations was given by Theodor Wiegand in his VIth and VIIth provisional Reports, see above, p. 13, n. 6.
16 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
plenty of native Greek archaeologists whose’ excellent work 1
vies with that of their foreign visitors.
1 Of many new discoveries let me mention only the inscriptions from Epidaurus, which we owe to the excavations of Panagiotis Kavvadias (cf. Larfeld 3, p. 82 f.). They are extraordinarily rich in material for the history of language and religion, and I have not yet drawn upon their treasures.
Continuation of notes to page 15 :— and Latin Inscriptions by William Kelly Prentice, New York, 1908), and Publications of the Princeton University Archaeological Expedition to Syria in 1904-1905 and 1909 (including Division III. : Greek and Latin Inscriptions in Syria by Enno Littmann and William Kelly Prentice (later also David Magie and Duane Reed Stuart), Leyden, 1907-1914 (cf. also Hiller von Gaertringen, Berliner Philologische Wochenschrift 1916 col. 840 ff.). The great majority of these inscriptions are Christian.
7 Cf. the inscriptions published by B. Powell in the American Journal of Archaeology, 2nd Series, Vol. 7 (1903) No. 1; also Erich Wilisch, Zehn Jahre amerikanischer Ausgrabung in Korinth, Neue Jahrbiicher fiir das
\PUSP HE
Fic. 3.—Door Inscription from Synagogue at Corinth, Imperial Period. Now in Corinth Museum.
klassische Altertum, etc. 11 (1908) Bd. 21, Heft 6. Among the inscriptions there is one (No. 40), no doubt the remains of an inscription over a door, which is of interest in connexion with Acts xviii. 4: [ovva]ywyy ᾿Ἑβρ[αἰων), ‘ Synagogue of the Hebrews.” I reproduce it here from a rubbing taken by me at the Corinth Museum, 12 May 1906 (Figure 3). The inscription is 18} inches long; the letters are from 2} to. 3} inches high. The writing reminds one somewhat of the Jewish inscription in the theatre at Miletus, published in Appendix VIII. of the present work. Baron Hiller von Gaer- tringen very kindly gave me his épinion (in letters dated Berlin, 14 January and 26 February, 1907) that the mason copied exactly the written characters that were set before him; as extreme limits within which the inscription must have been made the dates 100 B.c. and 200 A.D. might, with some reservation, be assumed.—It is therefore a possibility seriously to be reckoned with that we have here the inscription to the door of the Corinthian synagogue mentioned in Acts xviii. 4, in which St. Paul first preached! The miserable appearance of the inscription, which is without ornament of any kind, is typical of the social position of the people whom St. Paul had before him in that synagogue, many of whom certainly were included among the Corinthian Christians that he afterwards described in 1 Cor. i. 26-31.—The Corinthian inscription bears also on the interpretation of the expression συναγωγὴ Aifpéwy which is found in an inscription at Rome (Schiirer, Geschichte des judischen Volkes III. Ὁ. 46 (Eng. trs. by Sophia Taylor and Peter Christie, Edinburgh, 1885, Div. II. Vol. II.? p. 248]; Schiele, The American Journal of
(For continuation of note see next page.
THE PROBLEM 17
We await with most lively expectations the Greek volumes of the new Corpus of the inscriptions of Asia Minor, Tituli Asiae Minoris, now preparing at Vienna after important preliminary expeditions by the Austrian archaeologists ! in search of new material. A large portion of the back- ground of the Pauline cult of Christ, its propaganda. and its church life will here be made accessible to us. Biblical philologists are provided with a mine of information in Wilhelm Dittenberger’s splendid Ovientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae,? a comprehensive work distinguished by the accuracy of its texts and the soundness of its commentary. Works like this and the same author’s Sylloge Inscriptionum Graec- arum,® and the collections of E. L. Hicks,4 E. 5. Roberts
1 Reisen im stidwestlichen Kleinasien, Vol. I. Reisen in Lykien und Karien
. . von Otto Benndorf und Georg Niemann, Wien, 1884; Vol. II. Recsen in Lykien, Milyas und Kibyratis . . . von Eugen Petersen und Felix von Luschan, Wien, 1889; Opvamoas. Inschriften vom Heroon zu Rhodiapolis . . neu bearbeitet von Rudolf Heberdey, Wien, 1897; Stddte Pamphyliens und Pisidiens ynter Mitwirkung von G. Niemann und E. Petersen herausgegeben von Karl Grafen Lanckoronski, Vol. I. Pamphylien, Wien, 1890; Vol. II. Pisidien, Wien, 1892; Rudolf Heberdey and Adolf Wilhelm, Reisen in Kilikien ausgefiihrt 1891 und 1892, Denkschriften der Kaiserl. Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien, Philos.-hist. Klasse 44. Bd. (1896) 6. Abhandlung; Rudolf Heberdey and Ernst Kalinka, Bevicht tiber zwet Reisen im siidwest- lichen Kleinasien (1894 und 1895), ibid. 45. Bd. (1897) 1. Abhandlung; Josef Keil and Anton von Premerstein, Bericht tiber eine Reise in Lydien und dey stidlichen Aiolis, ausgefiihri 1906, ibid. 53. Bd. (1908) 2. Abhandlung; Bericht tibey eine zwette Reise in Lydien, ausgefiihrt 1908, ibid. 54. Bd. (1909) 2. Abhandlung; Bericht iiber eine driite Reise in Lydien und den angrenzenden Gebieten Joniens, ausgefihrt 1911, ibid. 57. Bd. (1914) τ. Abhandlung.
2 2 vols., Leipzig, 1903 and 1905.
3 3 vols., 2nd ed., Leipzig, 1898-r90r. During the war there began to appear—a precious gift for those hard times to bring—the completely revised and greatly enlarged 3rd ed., the work of Baron Friedrich Hiller von Gaer- tringen in conjunction with Johannes Kirchner, Johannes Pomtow, Erich
{For continuation of notes see next page.
Continuativn ot nuce to page 15 :—
Theology, 1905, p. 290 ff.). Idonot think that ‘EBpato. means Hebrew-speaking Jews. They are more likely to be Aramaic-speaking Jews of Palestine, uniting with their fellow-countrymen abroad. Cf.now my remarks in t Nikolaus Miller, Die Inschriften der jidischen Katakombe am Monteverde zu Rom, edited by N. A. Bees (BEH2), Leipzig, 1919, p. 24 (also pp. 58, 72, 98, 106f., 112 173).—Further reports of the American excavations at Corinth are given in the American Journal of Archaeology, 2nd Series, Vol. 8 (1904) p. 433 ff., 9-(1905) p. 44 ff., 10 (1906) p. 17 ff., and later volumes. Cf. also Cobern, Pp. 493 ff., who refers further to the Journal of Hellenic Studies 1897-1914, and A. S. Cooley in Records of the Past, 1902, pp. 33-88.
18 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
(and E. A. Gardner),! Charles Michel,? R. Cagnat,? and others, are admirably adapted for use by theologians as introductions to the special studies of the masters of Greek epigraphy. When the Greek inscriptions of the Jews of the Diaspora are made more accessible, particularly useful results may be expected: Nikolaus Miiller’s posthumous work ὅ is a valuable beginning.
I have already mentioned the studies by Walch and Miinter, who, so far as I know, were the first to employ Greek inscriptions in the elucidation of the New Testament. Since then * their followers in this path have been chiefly British 7 scholars, e.g. Bishop Lightfoot and Edwin Hatch in many of their writings; E. L. Hicks,’ who has been already
1 An Introduction to Greek Epigraphy, Cambridge, 1887 and 1905.
2 Recueil d’Inscriptions Grecques, Bruxelles, 1900; Supplément, Fasc. 1, 1012.
3 Inscriptiones Graecae ad res Romanas pertinentes, Paris, 1901 ff.
4 Indispensable is Wilhelm Larfeld’s Handbuch der griechischen Epigraphik, planned on a great scale: Vol. I., Einleitungs- und Hilfsdisziplinen. Die nichtattischen Inschriften, Leipzig, 1907; Vol. II., Die attischen Inschriften, Leipzig, 1902; Vol. III. (subject index to the inscriptions) in preparation. His outline in the Handbuch der klassischen Altertumswissenschaft has been already mentioned, p. 11, n. 3 above.
5 Die Inschriften der jiidischen Katakombe am Monteverde zu Rom enideckt und erklart von Nikolaus Milley. Completed and edited after the author’s death by Nikos A. Bees (BEH2), Leipzig, 1919. I was myself privileged to take an active share in editing this work of my friend, whose early decease we deplore.
* A complete bibliography is not aimed at, and would now be impossible under the circumstances of the time. I refer, however, to my fourth report on the linguistic study of the Greek Bible, Theologische Rundschau 15 (1912) PP. 339-364. The international literature of the subject has increased greatly in the last ten years.
7 Richard Adelbert Lipsius, the son who edited Karl Heinrich Adelbert Lipsius’ Grammatische Untersuchungen δον die biblische Grdcitat, Leipzig, 1863, tells us (Preface, p. viii) that his father contemplated a large Grammar of the Greek Bible, in which he would have availed himself of the discoveries of modern epigraphy. He has in fact done so to some extent in the “ Unter- suchungen,”
® “ On some Political Terms employed in the New Testament,” The Classical
Review, Vol. I. (1887) pp. 4 ff., 42 ff. I first heard of these excellent articles through Sir W. M. Ramsay in 1898.
Continuation of notes to page 17 :— Ziebarth, Hermann Diels, and Otto Weinreich (though not one of the six names is on the title-page): Vol. 1, 1915; 2, 1917; 3, 1920; 4 (indices), first half, 1920.
4 A Manual of Greek Historical Inscriptions, Oxford, 1882.
: τὸς : New and revised edition by E. L. Hicks and G. F. Hill, Oxford, rgor.
THE PROBLEM 19
mentioned as one of the editors of the inscriptions of Cos and of the British Museum inscriptions; and most par- ticularly Sir William Ramsay—who has himself done great things for the epigraphy of Asia Minor—in a long series of well-known works. A French Jesuit. father, Louis Jalabert, has also displayed great mastery in his valuable article on Epigraphy? and in other works. In Germany E. Schiirer had, in his classical work, The History of the Jewish People in the Time of Jesus Christ, and elsewhere, made the happiest and most profitable use of the inscrip- tions? and their importance has not escaped the learning of Theodor Zahn, Georg Heinrici,? Adolf Harnack, and others. Paul Wilhelm Schmiedel, in his excellent adaptation of Winer’s Grammar,* has drawn most freely on the inscrip- tions in dealing with the accidence. They have been turned to account for the philology of the Septuagint by Heinrich Anz,° but most particularly by the authors of the first Grammars of the Septuagint, Robert Helbing ὁ and Henry St. John Thackeray’; also by Jean Psichari 8 and Richard Meister.® Heinrich Reinhold? and Friedrich Rostalski,!!
1 Dictionnaive apologétique de la Fot catholique, I. col. 1404-1457, Paris, τοῖο.
2 Important use is also made of the inscriptions (and papyri) in a kindred work by a Frenchman: Jean Juster, Les Juifs dans l’'Empive Romain, 2 vols., Paris, 1914.
3 In his studies on the organisation of the Corinthian churches the inscrip- tions were made use of.
4 Gottingen, 1894 ff.; cf. Theol. Rundschau, 1 (1897-1898) p. 465 ff.
5 Subsidia ad cognoscendum Graecorum sermonem vulgarem e-Pentateuchi versione Alexandrina repetita, Dissertationes Philologicae Halenses Vol. 12, Halis Sax., 1894, pp. 259-387; cf. Theol. Rundschau, 1 (1897-1898) p. 468 ff.
® Grammatik der Septuaginta, Laut- und Wortlehre, Géttingen, 1907. Cf. the important corrections by Jacob Wackernagel, Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 33 (1908) col. 635 ff.
7 A Grammar of the Old Testament in Greek according to the Septuagint, Vol. I., Cambridge, 1909.
5 Essai sur le Grec de la Sepiante. Extraite de la Revue des Etudes juives, Avril 1908, Paris, 1908.
® Prolegomena zu einey Grammatik der Septuaginta, Wiener Studien 29, (1907) 228-259; Beitrage zur Lautlehve dey LXX, offprint from the “ Tatig- keitsbericht des Vereines klassischer Philologen an der Univ. Wien, 1909,” Wien, 1909.
10 De graecitate Patrum Apostolicorum librorumque apocryphorum Novi Testamenti quaestiones grammaticae, Diss. Phil. Hal. Vol. 14, Pars. 1, Halis Sax., 1898, pp. 1-115; cf. Wochenschrift fir klassische Philologie, 1902,
col. 89 ff. [For note 11 see next page.
20 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
following Anz, compared the inscriptions with the Greek of the Apostolic Fathers and the New Testament Apocrypha. In my “ Bible Studies ” 1 an attempt was made to show what they will yield for the purposes of early Christian lexicography, and the like -has been done by H. A. A. Kennedy.? In “‘ New Bible Studies 5.1 examined particularly the inscrip- tions of Pergamum and part of the inscriptions from the islands of the Aegean, while at my suggestion Gottfried Thieme 4 worked at the inscriptions of Magnesia on the Maeander and Jean Rouffiac ὅ at those of Priene. Epigraphy yields a rich harvest in Theodor Nageli’s study of the language of St. Paul,® in the Grammar of New Testament Greek by Friedrich Blass,’ and still richer in those by James Hope Moulton ® and Ludwig Radermacher,® and in the
1 Bibelstudien : Beitrage, zumeist aus den Papyri und Inschriften, zur Geschichte der Sprache, des Schrifttums und der Religion des hellenistischen Judentums und des Urchristentums, Marburg, 1895. English translation (together with the ‘“‘ Neue Bibelstudien”’) by A. Grieve, under the title “* Bible Studies,’ Edinburgh, 1901; 2nd ed. 1903; 3rd ed. 1923.
2 Sources of New Testament Greek, Edinburgh, 1895; cf. Gott. gel. Anzeigen, 1896, p. 761 ff.
3 Neue Bibelstudien : sprachgeschichtliche Beitrage, zumeist aus den Papyri und Inschriften, zur Erklarung des N. T., Marburg, 1897. ~ 4 Die Inschriften von Magnesia am Mdander und das Neue Testament: eine sprachgeschichtliche Studie [Dissert. Heidelberg, 1905], Gottingen, 1906; cf. Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 31 (1906) col. 231.
5 Recherches sur les cavactéves du grec dans le Nouveau Testament d'apres les inscriptions de Priéne, Paris, 1911.
& Dev Wortschatz des Apostels Paulus: Beitrag zur sprachgeschichtlichen Erforschung des N. T., Gottingen, 1905; cf. Theol, Lit.-Ztg. 31 (1906) col. 228 ff.
τ Grammatik des Neutestamentlithen Griechisch, Géttingen, 1896, 2nd ed. -rg02; cf. Géttingische gelehrte Anzeigen, 1898, p. 120 ff., and Berl. Philol. Wochenschrift 24 (1904) col. 212 ff. [Blass’s Grammar was translated into English by H. St. J. Thackeray, London, 1898, 2nd ed. 1905. ΤῈ. Com- pletely revised by Albert Debrunner for the 4th and 5th editions (1913, 1921), a veritable treasury of New Testament philology.
8. Grammar of New Testament Greek, Edinburgh, 1906, 2nd ed. the same year, 3rd ed. 1908; cf. Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 31 (1906) col. 238 f., 32 (1907) col.
~ [For continuation of notes see next page.
Continuation of notes, to page 19.
11 Sprachliches zu den apokryphen Apostelgeschichten, two “' programs,” essays accompanying the annual report of the Grammar School (“" Gymna- sium ’’) of Myslowitz, Upper Silesia, 1910 and 1911; Die Sprache dey grie- chischen Paulusakten mit Berticksichtigung thver lateinischen Ubersetzungen, Myslowitz, 1913. 7
THE PROBLEM 21
large Grammar by A. T. Robertson.1 New Testament lexicographers in the past made but occasional use of the inscriptions, and Hermann Cremer, when he did so, was at times absolutely misleading in consequence of his peculiar dogmatic attitude on the subject. The additions which were made, chiefly by Adolf Schlatter, to Cremer’s last edition of his Biblico-Theological Lexicon of New Testament Greek® afford illustrations, in some important points, of the knowledge which the lexicographer in particular may gain from the inscriptions. In recent years, after a falling off in the case of Erwin Preuschen’s Manual Lexicon, an improvement has set in,’ and Moulton and Milligan’s Vocabulary of the Greek Testament,* with its vast collection of material ‘‘from the papyri and other non-literary sources,” is also a promising new beginning by reason of its comprehensive use of the inscriptions. Honour- able mention has long been due to Hans Lietzmann and Johannes Weiss for attention bestowed on the inscriptions, by Lietzmann in his Commentaries on Romans and First Corinthians 5 (excellent on the philological side), and by Weiss in his substantial articles in Herzog and Hauck’s
1 4 Grammar of the Greek New Testament in the Light of Historical Research, New York, 1914. A book of 1400 large octavo pages. A small predecessor of this Grammar has appeared in several languages.
2 Biblisch-theologisches Wérterbuch der Neutestamentlichen Grdcitat, 9th ed., Gotha, 1902, p. 1119 f. The 1oth ed. (Gotha, 1911], in its way a very meritorious revision by Julius Kégel, is an improvement also in this respect. (Latest ed. of the Engl. trans. of Cremer is the 4th, Edinburgh, 1908. Tr.]
3 See on this subject Chapter V. of the present work.
4. At present six parts have appeared, London, 1914, 1915, 1919, 1920, 1924, 1927.
5 Handb. zum N. T. (III.), Tiibingen, 1906 f. The collaborators on Lietz-
mann’s ‘‘ Handbook ” (and those employed on Zahn’s ‘‘ Commentary ”’) have also for their part shown a gratifying interest in the non-literary texts,
Continuation of note to page 20 :—
38 f. German translation of the 3rd ed., Eznleitung in die Sprache des Neuen Testaments, Heidelberg, 1911. Since Moulton’s tragic death Wilbert Francis ‘Howard has continued the English edition of the Grammar, publishing two parts of Vol. II. in 1919 and 1920.—Moulton’s inaugural lecture in the University of Manchester, ‘‘ The Science of Language and the Study of the New Testament,’’ Manchester, 1906, also deserves notice. [Reprinted in his posthumous book, The Christian Religion in the Study and the Street, London, 1919, pp. 117-144. TR.]
® Neutestamentliche Grammatik, Tabingen, 1911; 71925.
22 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Realencyclopédie.1 Copious use of new material has also been made by George Milligan in his Commentary on the Epistles to the Thessalonians? by William H. P. Hatch,’ and by William Duncan Ferguson.4
We are further indebted for:most valuable enlightenment to the philologists pure and simple who have extracted grammatical and lexical material from the inscriptions, or have compiled from the new texts complete grammars of the universal Greek current from the death of Alexander onwards into the Imperial age. Such are the special inves- tigations of K. Meisterhans,5> Eduard Schweizer,* Wilhelm Schulze,’ Ernst Nachmanson,® Jacob Wackernagel,® and in a special degree the great works of ἃ. N. Hatzidakis,!° Karl Dieterich," and Albert Thumb,” which are full of references
1 Realencyclopadie fiir protestantische Theologie und Kirche, 3rd ed.; see especially the excellent article on “ Kleinasien.”’ ' 2 London, 1908.
5 Some Illustrations of New Testament Usage from Greek Inscriptions of Asia Minor, Journal of Biblical Literature, Vol. 27, Part 2, 1908, pp. 134-46. The discovery of ἀγάπη, “‘ love,” in a pagan inscription of the Imperial period from Tefeny in Pisiflia (Papers of the American School of Classical Studies at Athens, 2, 57) would be important if the word ἀγά[πη]ν were here rightly restored; we should then have a proof of the profane origin of the word, which I have long suspected (Neue Bibelstudien, p. 27; Btble Studies, p. 199). But it now seems to me more probable that we ought to read ἀγα[θόἠν, cf. F. Heinevetter’s dissertation, Wirfel- und Buchstabenorakel in Griecheniand und Kleinasien, Breslau, 1912, p. 10, and the parallels on p. 25. On ἀγάπη see also p. 75, n. 3 below.
“ The Legal Terms common to the Macedonian Inscriptions and the N.T., Chicago, 1913.—For the rest it may be said, I think, of all the N.T. commentaries and multifarious separate investigations of the last fifteen years (1908-23) that they have drawn more and more exhaustively upon the non-literary sources
5 Grammatik dey attischen Inschriften, 3rd ed.revised by Eduard Schwyzer, Berlin, 1900.
5. Grammatik dey pergamenischen Inschriften, Berlin, 1898; and (published under the name of Schwyzer, which he assumed) Die Vulgdrsprache der attischen Fluchtafeln, Neue Jahrbiicher fir das klass. Altertum, 5 (1900) p. 244 ff.
τ Graeca Latina, Gottingen (Einladung zur akadem. Preisverkiindigung), 1901.
® Laute und Formen dev magnetischen Inschriften, Uppsala, 1903. And many other works by Nachmanson, mostly appearing in ‘‘ Eranos”’ (Uppsala) or as separate publications. ;
9 Hellenistica, Gottingen (Einladung zur akadem. Preisverkiindigung), 1907.
10 Einleitung in die neugriechische Grammatik (Bibliothek indogerm. Gram- matiken, V.), Leipzig, 1892.
1 Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der griechischen Sprache von dev hellenis- tischen Zeit bis zum 10. Jahrhundert n. Chr. (Byzantinisches Archiv, Heft 1), Leipzig, 1898.
42 Die griechische Sprache im Zeitaltey des Hellenismus, Strassburg, 1901 ; cf. Theol. Lit.-Ztg, 26 (1901) col. 684 ff.
THE PROBLEM . 23
to usages in the language of the Greek Old and New Testaments.!
Of the Christian inscriptions? and their direct value to the scientific study of early Christianity I have not to speak; but I wish at least to say that in one direction they promise a greater harvest than many people might expect, viz. with respect to the history of the text of Scripture and its use. Already with the materials at present known to us quite a large work could be written on the text of Scripture and its use as illustrated by Biblical quotations in ancient Christian (and Jewish) inscriptions.’ It is to be hoped that the Corpus of Greek Christian inscriptions now planned in France will not only put an end to the shameful neglect * with which
4 To the philologists add A. Meillet, Apergu d'une histoire de la langue grecque, Paris, 1913, p. ix.
2 The most distinguished workers on this subject in recent years are Sir William M. Ramsay, Franz Cumont, Gustave Lefebvre, Louis Jalabert, etc.
3 Single points have been treated by E. Bohl, Theol. Stud. und Kritiken, 1881, pp. 692-713, and E, Nestle, zbid., 1881, p. 692, and 1883, p. 153 f.; by myself, Ein epigraphisches Denkmal des alexandrinischen A. T. (Die Bleitafel von Hadrumetum), Bibelstudien, p. 21 ff. [Bible Studies, p. 269], Die Rachegebete von Rheneia (p. 15, n. τ, above), and Verkannte Bibelzitate in syrischen und mesopotamischen Inschriften, Philologus, 1905, p. 475 ff., reprinted in the Appendix (No. X) to this book; by Baron F. Hiller von Gaertringen, Uber eine jimgst auf Rhodos gefundene Bleirolle, enthaltend den 80. Psalm, Sitzungsberichte der Kgl. Preuss. Ak. der Wissensch. zu Berlin, 1898, p. 582 ff., cf. U. Wilcken, Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung, 1, p. 430f.; and by P, Perdrizet, Bull. de Corr. hellén. 20 (1896), p. 394 ff., who comments on a marble slab from Cyprus inscribed with the 15th Psalm, and refers to other texts of Scripture preserved in inscriptions from Northern Syria, the Hauran, and Southern Russia. Cf. also Ludwig Blau, Das altjiidische Zauberwesen (Jahresbericht der Landes-Rabbinerschule in Budapest, 1897-8), Budapest, 1898, p. 95; and particularly Richard Winsch, Antike Fluchtafeln (Lietz- mann’s Kleine Texte fiir theologische Vorlesungen und Ubungen, 20), Bonn, 1907 (of which a 2nd ed. has appeared); and Alfred Rahlfs, Septuaginta- Studien 11., Géttingen, 1907, p. 14 ff. For the Latin inscriptions cf. Joachim Gensichen, De Scripturae Sacrae vestigiis in inscriptionibus latinis christianis, a doctoral dissertation, Greifswald, 1910. [The work will be facilitated by E. Diehl’s collection of Inscriptiones Latinae Christianae Veteres, Berlin, , 1923.—TR.]
* Sometimes they are not even recognised. £.g. the inscription from Tehfah (Taphis) in Nubia, Corpus Inscriptiogum Graecarum, No. 8888, fac- similed at the end of the volume and considered unintelligible by the editor, is a fairly large fragment of the Septuagint, from Exodus xv. and Deuteronomy xxxii. It-is all the more creditable of Adolph Wilhelm, therefore, to have detected in a pagan inscription of the 2nd century 4.p. from Euboea echoes of the Septuagint Deuteronomy xxviii. 22, 28 (Εφημερις Apxatodoyixn, 1892, col, 173 ff.; Dittenberger, Sylloge,2 No 891; *No. 1240). This inscription is one of the oldest of the records which have been influenced by the Greek Bible. The assumption that it was composed by a proselyte is neither
24 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
epigraphists have treated these memorials, but will also help towards the completion of this task.
There is one circumstance which sometimes makes the inscriptions less productive than might have been expected, especially those that are more or less of the official kind.” The style has often been polished up, and then they are formal, artificial, cold as the marble that bears. them, and stiff as the characters incised upon the unyielding stone. As a whole the inscriptions are not so fresh and natural as the papyri, and this second group, of which we are now to speak, is therefore, linguistically 2 at any rate, the most important.
(ὃ) The Papyri. One of the most important writing materials used by the ancients was the papyrus sheet.? It
necessary nor probable; it is more natural to assume that the composer simply adopted a syncretic formula of cursing which had been influenced by the Septuagint.
1 Cf. Neue Bibelstudien, Ὁ. 7{.; Bible Studies, p. 179; Thieme, Die In- schriften von Magnesia am Maander und das Neue Testament, Ὁ. 4 f.
3 Lexically, however, the yield of the inscriptions is undoubtedly very important.
3 In the following pages I have made use of my article on ‘‘ Papyri ”’ in the Encyclopaedia Biblica, 111. col. 3556 ff., and the article on “‘ Papyrus und Papyri’”’ (founded on the other) in Herzog and Hauck’s Realencyclopadie fiir Theologie und Kirche, *X1IV. Ὁ. 667 ff. Cf. also an article intended for theological readers by F. G. Kenyon on “ Papyri’’ in Hastings’ Dictionary of the Bible, Suppl. Vol. p. 352 ff., and G. J. Pontier, De papyri en het N.T., Gereformeerd Theologisch Tijdschrift 1913 Sept., pp. 182-197. As introduc- tions to papyrology the following are to be recommended: Ulrich Wilcken, Die griechischen Papyrusurkunden, Berlin, 1897; Der heutige Stand der Papyrusforschung, Neue Jahrbiicher fir das klass. Altertum, etc., 1901, p. 677 ff.; Ludwig Mitteis, dus den griechischen Papyrusurkunden, Leipzig, 1900; Karl Schmidt (Elberfeld), Aus der griechischen Papyrusforschung, Das humanist. Gymnasium, 17 (1906) p. 33f. Specially important for legal scholars: O. Gradenwitz, Einfihrung in die Papyruskunde, 1., Leipzig, 1900: and Paul M. Meyer, Juristische Papyri. Evkidrung von Urkunden zur Einfuh- * yung in die juristische Papyruskunde, Berlin, 1920.—Splendid guides to the subject are Wilhelm Schubart’s Einfihrung in die Papyruskunde, Berlin, 1918, and Papyri Graecae Bevolinenses, Bonnae, 1911 (well selected phototypes). A popular introduction was provided by George Milligan, Heve and Theve among the Papyri, London, 1922.—Bibliographies have been published by C. Haberlin, Paul Viereck [thrge great reports in the Jahresbericht iiber die Fortschritte der klassischen Altertumswissenschaft, Vols. 98 (1898), 102 (1899), 131 (1906)], Carl Wessely, Seymour de Ricci, Pierre Jouguet, etc. Further details will be found in Nicolas Hohlwein’s La Papyvologie Grecque : Biblio- graphie raisonnée (Ouvrages publiés avant le ret janvier, Ἴ905), Louvain, 1905, a careful book enumerating even at that date 819 items. Cf. also as brief guides Hohlwein’s essays, Les Papyrus Grecs d’Egypte (extrait du Bibliographe moderne, 1906), Besancon, 1907, and Les Papyrus Grecs et
THE PROBLEM 25
takes its name from the papyrus plant (Cyperus papyrus L., Papyrus antiquorum Willd.). At the present day the plant is found growing in the Sudan! and Central Africa,? in Palestine,’ in Sicily (especially near Syracuse), and also in Italy on the shores of Lake Trasimeno.4 It is probably
rEgypte, Province Romaine (extrait de la Revue Générale, Octobre 1908), Bruxelles, 1908; also George Milligan, Some Recent Papyrological Pub- lications, The Journal of Theological Studies, April 1908, p. 465 ff.; and J. H. Moulton, From Egyptian Rubbish-Heaps, The London Quarterly Review, April 1908, p. 212 ff. Under the same title one of Moulton’s latest works appeared in the form of a small book, London, 1916.—Small collections for first study: Hans Lietzmann, Griechische Papyri (Kleine Texte, 14), Bonn, 1905, 2nd. ed. 1910; George Milligan, Selections from the Greek Papyri, Cam- bridge, 1910; Robert Helbing, Auswahl aus griechischen Papyri, Sammlung Géschen, Berlin and Leipzig, 1912; Arthur Laudien, Griechische Papyri aus Oxyrhynchos fir den Schulgebrauth ausgewahlt, Berlin, 1912.—Other popular accounts need not be cited.—The central organ for the new science of papyr- ology is the Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung und verwandte Gebiete, founded and edited by Ulrich Wilcken, Leipzig, 1900 ff. Cf. also the Studien zur Palaeographie und Papyruskunde, founded by Carl Wessely, Leipzig, 1901 ff. ; The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology (London); Revue Egyptologique (Paris); Aegyptus (Milan). A very attractive book written for a very general public is that by Adolf Erman and Fritz Krebs, Aus den Papyrus der Koniglichen Museen (one of the illustrated handbooks issued by the authorities of the Berlin Museums), Berlin, 1899. Corresponding to Dittenberger’s Sylloge Inscriptionum we have in the great work of L. Mitteis and U. Wilcken, Grundzige und Chrestomathte der Papyruskunde, 2 vols. in 4 half-vols., Leipzig, 1912, a book of papyri which collects together the results of earlier investiga- tions and at the same time stimulates the new work of research. For all further literature of the subject, not here mentioned, I refer to this book and the periodicals.
1 B. de Montfaucon, Dissertation sur la plante appellée Papyrus, Mémoires de l’Acad. royale des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres, Vol. VI., Paris, 1729, p- 592 ff.; Franz Woenig, Die Pflanzen im alten Agypten, ihre Heimat, Geschichte, Kultur, Leipzig, 1886, p. 74 ff.; L. Borchardt, Die aegyptische Pflanzensdule, Berlin, 1897, p. 25.
2 Albert Schweitzer, Zwischen Wasser und Urwald, Bern, 1921, p. 25 describes the fields of papyrus in the Ogowe district in the virgin forest of Western Equatorial Africa; H[enri] A[net] in Le Chrétien Belge 67 (1921) p. 253 describes them between Kitega and Kigali in Central Africa.
3 In Lake Hileh—" the waters of Merom ’’—and the Lake of Tiberias, also near Nahr el-Falik and Antipatris, cf. K, Baedeker, Paldstina und Syrien’, Leipzig, 1910, pp. xlix, 238, 242, 222; Paldstina-Jahrbuchsr916, p. 118.
4 J. Hoskyns-Abrahall, The Papyrus in Europe, The Academy, March 19, 1887, No. 776 (E. Nestle, Einfithrung in das Griechische N.T.,* Gottingen, 1899, p. 40; #1909, p. 48; [English translation, Textual Criticism of the Greek Testament (Theological Translation Library, Vol. XIII.), by Edie and Menzies, London, 1901, p. 42, ἢ. 3. TR.]).—I am told (18 October, 1922) by Pastor Bruno Tromm (formerly of Valparaiso and Santiago de Chile) that the papyrus plant grows well throughout Central Chile. My informant has himself made sheets of papyrus according to the ancient rules from stems of the plant grown in the botanical gardens of the Quinta Normal at Santiago de Chile.
26 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
cultivated in most botanical gardens, 6.5. at Berlin,’ Bonn (Poppelsdorf),2 Breslau,? Heidelberg. It is doubtless obtainable from all the leading nurserymen, and it was at one time a very popular indoor plant in Germany: “ palm” our mothers used to call it. As to its culture the firm of J. C. Schmidt, Erfurt, wrote to me® as follows: ‘‘ Cyperus papyrus has proved its suitability as a rapid-growing decora- tive plant for large sheets of water, aquariums, etc. In the open air it thrives here only in summer, and only in a warm, sheltered position. It is propagated from seed or from leaf-shoots; the latter are cut down to about half their length and put in water.’’ A. Wiedemann ° gives the follow- ing description of the plant: “A marsh plant, growing in shallow water; root creeping, nearly as thick as a man’s arm, with numerous root-fibres running downwards; several smooth, straight, triangular stalks, 10 to 18 feet high, con- taining a moist pith (whence the Hebrew name, from gama’, ‘to drink,’ ‘to sip up,’ and the phrase bibula papyrus in Lucan IV. 136), and surmounted by an involucre with brush-like plumes.”
The use of papyrus as a writing material goes back to extreme antiquity. The oldest written papyrus known to be in existence is, according to Kenyon,’ an account-sheet belonging to the reign of the Egyptian king Assa, which is conjecturally dated civca 2600 B.c.6 From these remote times until well on in the Mohammedan occupation of Egypt papyrus remains the standard writing material of that marvellous country, so that the history of its use in antiquity can be proved to extend over a period of about 3,500 years. Brittle and perishable as it appears on a superficial view, it is in reality as indestructible as the Pyramids and the obelisks. The splendid resistant qualities of the papyrus on which they
1 As I was inforgged by the Director, by letter, 20 October, 1902.
* Ditto, 17 October, 1902.
3 Ditto, 21 October, 1902.
4 Personal information from the Director. 5 18 October, 1902.
® Guthe, Kurzes Bibelwovterbuch, p. 501.
7 The Palaecography of Greek Papyri, Oxford, 1899, p. 14.
5 I now follow the chronology of Eduard Meyer. [Assa was a king of the 5th dynasty, and used often to be dated civca 3360 B.c., or even earlier. Dr. H. R. Hall, Ancient History of the Neay East,‘ London, 1919, pp. 26, 134, is inclined to put Assa about 2800 B.c. TR.]
THE PROBLEM 27
wrote have helped not a little to make the ancient Egyptians live again in the present age.
The preparation of this material has been often wrongly described. It is not correct to say, as even Gregory 1 once did, that it was made from the “ bast” of the plant. The process of manufacture was described for us by Pliny the Elder,’ and to make his account still more intelligible existing papyri have been examined by specialists. Kenyon 8 accordingly puts the matter thus :—The pith of the stem was cut into thin strips, which were laid side by side perpendicu- larly, in length and number sufficient to form a sheet. Upon these another layer of strips was laid horizontally. The two layers were then gummed together -with some adhesive material, of which Nile water was one of the ingredients. The resulting sheet was pressed, sun-dried, and made smooth by polishing, after which it was ready for use.
The manufacture of papyrus sheets goes on in much the same way even at the present day. In the autumn of 1902 my friend Adalbert Merx* met a lady in Sicily who had learnt the art from her father and apparently still practised it occasionally, It was probably the same lady that was referred to in the following account of ‘‘ Modern Syracusan Papyri ” in a German newspaper ὅ :—
“No visitor to Sicily who goes to Syracuse ever fails to take a walk along the shore, in the shade of a trim-kept avenue of
1 Texthritik des Neuen Testaments, I., Leipzig, 1900, p. 7ζ. Gregory informed me (postcard, Leipzig-Stétteritz, 29 June, 1908) that he had been perfectly acquainted with the method of making papyrus for more than thirty. years, and that the world ‘‘ bast’ was a mere slip of the pen. [The process is accurately described in C. R. Gregory’s Canon and Text of the New Testament (International Theological Library), Edinburgh, 1907, p. 301. ΤῈ]
2 Nat. Hist. 13, 11-13. Cf. Theodor Birt, Das antike Buchwesen, Berlin, 1882, p. 223 ff.; Karl Dziatzko, Untersuchungen tiber ausgewdhlte Kapitel des antiken Buchwesens, Leipzig, 1900, p. 49 ff. Pliny’s statements have been given popular currency in Georg Ebers’s romance Kaiser Hadrian. Cf. also an article by Ebers, on ‘“‘ The Writing Material of Antiquity,” in the Cosmo- politan Magazine, New York, November, 1893 (Nestle,? p. 40; [®p. 48; Eng. trans. p. 42, n. 3]. Theodor Reil’s Leipzig dissertation, Beitydge zur Kenntnis des Gewerbes im hellenistischen Agypten, Borna—Leipzig, 1913, Ὁ. 127 ff. deserves special attention.
® Palaeography, p. 15.
4 [The distinguished Orientalist (1838-1909) of Heidelberg.. TR.]
§ Frankfurter Zeitung, 12 April, 1906, No. 101, 2nd morning edition. The article is signed “ὟΝ. F.”
28 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
pretty trees, to the Fountain of Arethusa. Here, transformed into a bubbling spring, the daughter of Nereus and Doris con- tinues her deathless existence, and one likes to make her acquaintance in her watery element. But there is another attraction for the traveller besides the nymph, viz. the papyrus plants growing by the spring. The papyrus flourishes not only here, but also in great abundance in the valley of the Anapo near Syracuse! At the end of the 18th [Ὁ] century the plant which has done such service to learning was introduced at Syracuse from Alexandria and even employed industrially. In the course of centuries, however, it seems that the plantations in the Anapo valley ran waste, until at last a learned society at Naples requested the Italian Government to take proper steps for the preservation of the plant. The Government thereupon instituted an inquiry and commissioned the Syracuse Chamber of Commerce to report on the subject. From a translation of this report in the Papierzeitung it appears that a citizen of Syra- cuse, Francesco Saverio Landolina, began in the 18th century to manufacture papyrus exactly according to the directions given by the Roman scientist Pliny in the 13th Book of his Natural History. After Landolina’s death the brothers Politi continued the manufacture, and were followed by their sons, and to-day there are only two persons in Syracuse, viz. Madame de Haro and Professor G. Naro, descendants of the Politi family, who know and practise the art of making papyrus. They receive annually, with the consent of the Ministry for Education, 400 bundles of the plant, which they work up themselves, without assistance. They use for their work a wooden mallet made according to Pliny’s directions. The product is by no means so fine, close-grained, and white as the ancient papyri. The 200 sheets produced every year measure 9% X 7% inches each. Two bundles of the plant are required to make one of these sheets. The papyrus sheets are sold exclusively to tourists. Those with pictures of Syracusan architecture printed on them are the most popular. A German resident at Syracuse sticks these pictures on postcards and sells them to strangers. A sheet of papyrus costs .from 1} to 2 live, and those with pictures are dearer,”’
In November 1913 Hugo Ibscher, the conservator of the collection of papyri in the Berlin Museums, who has achieved a wide reputation by his reconstructions of: tattered papyri,
1 On his return from a visit to Sicily (12 Oct., 1913) Paul Schubring informed
me that the papyrus was still growing in these two places, and brought me a sheet of papyrus manufactured at Syracuse,
THE PROBLEM 29
succeeded in making sheets of papyrus of extremely good quality from a plant growing in the botanical garden at Dahlem, Berlin.
It is interesting to note that a project has been put forward more than once in recent years to revive the manufacture and make it a Government monopoly with a view to using papyrus as a material for banknotes that should defy imitation.
The size of the’single sheet of papyrus was not constant in ancient times, and there ought never to have been any doubt of this fact. Kenyon? has collected some measure- ments.. For most non-literary documents (letters, accounts, receipts, etc.) a single sheet was sufficient; for longer texts, especially literary ones, the necessary sheets were stuck together and made into a roll.2 Rolls have been found measuring as much as 20 and even 45 yards.
The regular format for ancient works of literature was the papyrus roll. There is a large fragment of a papyrus roll among the Leipzig fragments of the Psalter.4 It was usual to write on that side of the sheet on which the fibres ran hori- zontally (recto); the other side (verso) was used only excep- tionally. When a sheet of papyrus bears writing on both sides, in different hands, it may generally be assumed that the writing on the vecio is the earlier of the two. Only in exceptional cases was there writing on both sides of the sheets of a papyrus roll. There seems to be an instance in Ezekiel ii. 9, 10: “aroll of a book . . . written within and without.”’ Nestle® refers to Revelation v. 1, where some
1 According to the Deutsche Tageszeitung (Berlin), 17 Nov., 1911, No. 586, Georg Schmiedl (of Vienna) in the ‘‘ Dokumente des Fortschritts ’’ reported on revived plantations of papyrus for industrial purposes in the delta of the Nile. [English newspapers in 1921 reported that Belgians in the Congo region and Norwegians in Zululand were trying to make paper from the papyrus which grows there by the modern method of pulping. TR.]
2 Palaeography, p. 16 f.
3 Rolls were sometimes manufactured by the makers of papyrus, twenty sheets being generally stuck together for the purpose. See L. Borchardt, Zeitschr. f. die 4gyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde, 27 (1889), p. 120, and U, Wilcken, Hermes, 28 (1893), p. 166 f.
4 Edited by G. Heinrici, Beitrage zur Geschichte und Evkldrung des N. T., IV., Leipzig, 1903.
5 U. Wilcken, Recto oder Verso, Hermes (22) 1887, p. 487 ff.
8 Einfihrung,? Ὁ. 41. [The English translation, 1901, p. 43, u. 2, says the passage ‘‘ can no longer be cited in support of this practice, seeing we must
130 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
authorities read “a book written within and on the back.”
In the later centuries of antiquity we find also the papyrus book or codex, which finally triumphs over the roll. It is not true that the transition from roll to book was the result of the introduction of parchment. To give only a few instances, the British Museum possesses a fragment of a papyrus codex of the Iliad, probably of the 3rd century a.D.1| Among the Oxyrhynchus Papyri there is a leaf from a codex of the gospels, containing Matthew i. 1-9, 12, 14-20, of, the 3rd century, besides other fragments of Biblical codices. The University Library at Heidelberg possesses twenty-seven leaves from an old codex of the Septuagint. And the sayings of Jesus - found at Oxyrhynchus are also on a leaf from a codex.
When we consider the important part played by papyrus in the life of the ancient world, it is by no means surprising to find it mentioned in Scripture. The papyrus plant is spoken of in Job viii. rr and Isaiah xxxv. 7; in the former passage the translators of the Septuagint use the word papyrus, and again in Job xl. 16 (21) and Isaiah xix. 6. The “ark of bulrushes ” in which Moses was laid (Exodus ii. 3) was a small papyrus boat,’ like the ‘‘ vessels of bulrushes”’ in Isaiah xviii. 2.32 The writer of the Second Epistle of St. John mentions papyrus as a writing material, for the chartes referred to in verse 12 was doubtless a sheet of papyrus. So too the “ books ” that Timothy was requested to bring with him to St. Paul (2 Tim. iv. 13) were no doubt made of papyrus, for they are expressly distinguished from “ the parchments.”
We may now turn to the recent discoveries of papyri and see what their value has been to scholarship in general.
The first recorded purchase of papyri by European visitors to Egypt was in 1778. In that year a nameless dealer in antiquities bought from some peasants a papyrus roll of
”
take καὶ ὄπισθεν with κατεσφραγισμένον.᾽" In the third German edition, however, 1909, p. 48, n. 1, Nestle still cited the passage, merely remarking that the other way of construing it is perhaps more correct. It remains also in the edition revised by E. von Dobschiitz, Géttingen, 1923, p. 33. Nestle died in 1913. ΤΑ] But the original reading was probably different; cf. p. 35, n. 5 below.
1 Kenyon, Palaeography, p. 25.
2 Here Aquila translates παπυρεών.
8. See an ancient Egyptian picture in Guthe’s Kurzes Bibelwérterbuch, p. 502; and cf. S. Witkowski, Eos 14 (1908), p. 13.
THE PROBLEM 31
documents from the year 101-102 A.D., and looked on while they set fire to fifty or so others simply to enjoy the aromatic smoke that was produced.1 Since that date an enormous quantity of inscribed papyri in all possible languages, of ages varying from a thousand to nearly five thousand years, have been recovered from the magic soil of the ancient seats of civilisation in the Nile Valley. From about 1820 to 1840 the museums of Europe acquired quite a respectable number of papyri from Memphis and Letopolis in Middle Egypt, and from This, Panopolis, Thebes, Hermonthis, Elephantine, and Syene in Upper Egypt. Not many scholars took any notice of them at first, and only a very few read and profited by them.
The next decisive event, apart from isolated finds, was the discovery of papyri in the province of El-Fayim (Middle Egypt) in 1877: To the north of the capital, Medinet el- Fayim, lay a number of mounds of rubbish and debris, marking the site of the ancient “ City of Crocodiles,” after- wards called “‘ The City of the Arsinoites,” and these now yielded up hundreds and thousands of precious sheets and scraps. Since then there has been a rapid succession of big finds, which have not ceased even yet : we are still in a period of important discoveries. In the external history of the discoveries the most noteworthy feature is that so many of the papyri have been dug up with the spade from Egyptian rubbish-heaps.? Antiquaries had set the example by ex- cavating in search of the foundations of ancient temples or fragments of prehistoric pottery, and now the excavators seek papyri. The excavations carried out by Drs. Bernard P, Grenfell? and Arthur S. Hunt rank with the most celebrated archaeological excavations of modern times both in the delicacy of their operations and in the value of their results.
1 Wilcken, Die griechischen Papyrusurkunden, p. 10; which see also for what follows.—The first papyri known to have reached Europe were presented ᾿ to the library at Bale by the theologian Johann Jakob Grynaeus at the end of the 16th cent.—one Greek and two Latin fragments, which long remained neglected as ‘‘ Turkish ’’ texts. They were published by Ernst Rabel in the Abhandlungen der Kgl. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Géttingen, Phil.- hist. Klasse, new series, 16 No. 3 (1917). ©
2 Including several that were written outside Egypt, cf. Archiv f. Papyrus- forschung, 2, 138.
3 [Dr. Grenfell (born at Birmingham, 16 Dec., 1869) died17 May,1926. TR.}
32 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
The fact that so many of the papyri are found among the dust-heaps of ancient cities is a valuable indication of their general significance. The multitude of papyri from the Fayim, from Oxyrhynchus-Behnesa, etc., do not, as was at first supposed, represent the remains of certain great archives. They have survived as part of the contents of ancient refuse- heaps and rubbish-shoots. There the men of old cast out their bundles of discarded documents, from offices public and private, their worn-out books and parts of books; and there these things reposed, tranquilly abiding their undreamt-of fate.
New hopes have been aroused by two discoveries made within the last twenty years. The first was an unusually re- markable find+ of pre-Christian Greek documents on parch- ment? in Persian Kurdistan, the ancient kingdom of the Arsacidae. About the year 1909 a native peasant found in a cave on Kuh-i-S4l4n, one of the Avroman Mountains, an hermetically sealed jar containing shrivelled grains of millet and a number of documents. They went from hand to hand among the Kurds, and some were lost. Only three were preserved, and these were obtained after long efforts and at some personal risk by a Persian physician, Dr. Mirza Sa‘id Khan, who brought them to England.? In July ΙΟ14. they were sold by auction in London and found their way into the British Museum: two Greek parchments, one of which has also five lines of Aramaic writing on the back, and one parchment document in Aramaic writing. For the
1 Cf. my communication to the Archdologische Gesellschaft at Berlin on 6 Jan., 1914 (Archdologischer Anzeiger, 1914, 1) and my “ Evangelischer Wochenbrief " (‘‘ Protestant Weekly Letter ἢ) No. 63, 12 Feb. 1916.
2 Strictly speaking, we ought to consider this find by itself, and not with the papyri; but, since very ancient parchment fragments have been but rarely met with hitherto, it seems hardly worth while to make them a special group at present. It is probable, by the way, that the Avroman documents are the oldest parchments hitherto known. The next oldest are of the 2nd cent. A.D. (Minns, p. 24). Possibly, however, the material is not parchment, but leather ; MSS. on leather are in existence of considerably earlier date.
8 Concerning the history of the discovery and the topography of the place where the documents were found I have been favoured with detailed corre- spondence by Dr. Mirza Sa‘fd Khan and Ernst Herzfeld, who was in Kurdistan for some time during the war.
4 Mr. Minns informed me by letter (Cambridge, 15 March 1923) that “ A. Cowley made out the third Avroman document as the first monument of Pahlavi full of Aramaic words (Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, April
1919, Ὁ. 147).”
ΒΠΠΙΝ Ἢ SUIA ΠΥ JO uotssmused Ag ‘uwinasny Yst}Ig 911} UI MON, "ο΄ Ε΄ 99 “ἜΠΙ)194 Jo Wopsuly oy} Ul stuedoy Wo JUdWIYyoIeg ‘“pieAdUlA JO [91eq B 0} Surjejar apes jo yoerjuoQ—'h 51
ἼΒΤΙΤΙΙΤΛΙ “H SUA “AW 39 uotssiuiied Aq -“urnesny Yysorte 9111 UE MON H— Ὁ 9511
‘O'a 12-τξ ‘eyed fo WoOpsuly 9112 Ul stuedoy το} JUsUIYOIeT Ῥαβάϑττλ & 10 oseoy A1Ie}Ipete
hig SINKS
THE PROBLEM 33
publication of them in a model edition! we are greatly indebted to Ellis H. Minns.
The first of the two Greek documents (Figure 4) is a con- tract of sale relating to a parcel of vineyard drawn up in the year 88 B.c. in the Parthian village of Kopanis (Under- satrapy of Baiseira, post-station Baithabarta). It is witnessed by three persons? and written in duplicate on one sheet.?
The other Greek document (Figure 5), drawn up in the same Parthian village in 22-21 B.c., is a contract relating to the letting of a vineyard on hereditary lease. It is also witnessed by three persons 4 and written in duplicate,5 and it is moreover a fine illustration of the parable of the vine- yard let out to husbandmen,® which Jesus spoke some fifty years later. When it came into the editor’s hands the upper part of the document was still rolled up, and still bore some seals,’
* Parchments of the Parthian Period from Avroman in Kurdistan, Journal of Hellenic Studies 35 (1915), pp. 22-65 (with 3 plates). I received a copy of this important article in August 1915 by the unchanging kindness of the author, who had in 1913 sent me the text and supplied me with particulars. Cf. also Mitteis, Zeitschrift der Savigny-Stiftung 36 Pp. 425 ff., and Paul M. Meyer, Juristische Papyri No. 36. Minns kindly informed me (23 March, 1922) that new and improved facsimiles have appeared in the publications of the New Palaeographical Society II. III. 51 and 52.
2 Cf. the ‘‘ three that bear record” in 1 John v. 7.
* On this custom of drawing up a document in two copies, one “ inner ”’ (“closed ”’) and one “‘ outer ’”’ (‘open’), of which there are many instances in Semitic and Greek antiquity, cf. Mitteis, Grundztige und Chrestomathie II. 1, p. 77 ff., and Minns, p. 47. Our facsimiles (Figures 4 and 5) give the ‘inner ” text, which is on the upper portion of the sheet and was originally rolled and sealed up. Figure 5 it is true also shows in the last two lines the beginning of the ‘‘outer”’ text. It is, however, noteworthy that the wording of the ‘‘ outer ’’ duplicate copy does not completely agree with that of the “inner” original. The most striking difference is that the purchase- money, for which a receipt is given in the first document, is stated as 30 drachmae in the original, while in the copy thivty has been subsequently altered into forty. One would be tempted to think of the unjust steward : “take thy bill, and sit down quickly, and write fifty’ (Luke xvi. 6), were it not that external appearances make the suspicion of forgery improbable here (cf. Minns, p. 49).
4 Cf. n. 2 above. 5 Cf. ἢ, 3 above.
“ Mark xii. 1-9, Matt. xxi. 33-41, Luke xx. 9-16. The word used here for “Tet out” is ἐκδιδόναι, or, as in the Parthian parchment II. A 5, διδόναι (Mark xii. 9, Luke xx. 16), In the parable a share ‘‘ of the fruits of the vineyard "’ (ἀπὸ τῶν καρπῶν τοῦ ἀμπελῶνος) is to be given as rent; the Parthian document fixes a money payment, but also payments in kind, including two cotylae [about a pint] of wine.
7 See the diagram in Minns, p. 22..
34 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
In form and contents these Parthian texts are rich in parallels to the legal documents that come to us from Egypt. They symbolise the triumphant march of Western civilisation, and prove that the Hellenisation of the Parthian kingdom must have been greater than had hitherto been assumed. The contracting parties and the witnesses are all (to judge from the names) non-Greeks (no doubt Parthians) belonging to a small village; the names of places and persons are of the highest interest to students of Iranian etymology, but the documents are of great value to the historian in general, being dated by the reigns of Arsacidae and their consorts, with the Seleucid era as basis.
I should like here to insert one observation!: this find in Kurdistan, together with analogous documents among the papyri, throws a surprising light on Jeremiah xxxii. 8-15.
At the bidding of Jahveh the prophet Jeremiah buys of Hanameel, his uncle’s son, the field that isin Anathoth: “τὸ. And I subscribed the deed, and sealed it, and called witnesses, and weighed him the money (seventeen shekels of silver) in the balances. 11. So I took the deed of the purchase, both that which was sealed, the terms and conditions, and that which was open : 12. and I delivered the deed of the purchase unto Baruch... 13. and I charged Baruch . . . saying, 14. Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel: Take these deeds,? this deed of the purchase, both that which is sealed, and this deed which is open, and put them in an earthen vessel, that they may continue many days. 15. For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel : Houses and fields and vineyards shall yet again be bought in this land.” ᾿
What remarkable parallels to all the important details here are found in the Parthian parchments, down to the preservation of the document in an earthen jar!? I think, too, that it is now
1 I made it independently, and did not see until afterwards that the editor's sister had already drawn attention to the passage, and that ancient documents in duplicate had already been quoted in connexion with Jeremiah by Leopold Fischer, Zeitschrift fiir die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft 30 (1910) p. 136 ff., and by L. Blau in Judaica, a festival volume for Hermann Cohen’s seventieth birthday, Berlin, 1912, p. 207 ff.
3. On this plural see the remarks following.
5 There are other records showing that in antiquity documents and books were preserved in earthen vessels; I will only refer to the discovery of a Greek translation of the Old Testament ἐν πίθῳ (‘in a wine-jar ’’) by Origen at Jericho (Eusebius, Eccl. Hist. VI. xvi. 3; other testimonies, from Epiphanius
THE PROBLEM 35
possible to solve a much discussed textual problem relating to the .passage in Jeremiah. The Massoretic text, after speaking of one deed in verse 10, seems to assume two different deeds in verses 11 and 14. Wilhelm Rothstein! has conjectured that the two deeds are due to a misunderstanding of s’pharim (verse 14), which is to be understood in a singular sense as in 1 Kings xxi. 8 and Isaiah xxxvii. 14. He cites (but with disapproval) Hitzig and Stade, who considered that two portions of one and the same deed of sale were intended. It seems to me beyond doubt that the original text contemplated ome deed only, but that it was in two portions, the upper text being rolled and sealed up, while the lower text gave the “open” copy, readable at any time, as in the Parthian parchments and many other documents.? The Septuagint has preserved the correct text: “τὰ. And I took the deed of the purchase, both that which was sealed . . . and that which was read? ...14...... Take this deed of the purchase and the deed that was read and put it‘ in an earthen vessel that it may continue many days.”
I have no wish to enter into a detailed discussion, but I should at least like to call attention to another greatly discussed passage, Rev. v. r: ‘a book written within and without, close sealed with seven 56415. ὃ Even by those who handed down the text it was felt to be a crux and was therefore frequently altered, but it can be explained without difficulty when we remember the inside and outside writing of the ancient deed, and how it was sealed.
“That it may continue many days,” says the prophet. The vineyardmen of that Parthian village in the kingdom
etc., in Swete, An Introduction to the Old Testament in Greek, Cambridge, 1900, p- 54). When I was staying at Konieh in March, 1909, I was told by my Jewish dragoman, Calmus, that a Turkish peasant in the neighbourhood of Eregli had, while ploughing, found an earthen pot, and in the pot a parchment book. The khoja to whom he brought it bade him “ throw it into the water.’’ The peasant did so; but in summer, when the lake was drying up and the waters receded, somebody else found the manuscript again. This time the holy man ordered it ‘into the fire,” and so the old book was destroyed. The story of the find-is not altogether incredible. Cf. also p. 36, n. 1 below.
1 In the textual notes to Kautzsch’s edition of the Bible (71896), p. 45.
-? Cf. p. 33, ἢ. 3 above.
3 καὶ τὸ ἀνεγνωσμένον according to NA; the participle “read ’’ must here approximate to ‘‘readable.” Minns, Ὁ. 47, considers that ἀνεῳγμένον, ‘‘open(ed),”’ was perhaps the original reading.
4 αὐτό, singular, referring to one and the same sheet.
5 This text, βιβλίον γεγραμμένον ἔσωθεν καὶ ἔξωθεν κατεσφραγισμένον σφραγῖσιν ἑπτά, I agree with Bousset (Meyer’s Commentary, XVI,* Gottingen, 1906, p. 254), is the only one worth consideration.
36 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
of the Arsacidae have attained the like purpose with their documents: in a climate essentially different from that of Egypt, which is so extraordinarily favourable for the preser- vation of ancient texts, those parchment sheets have lasted more than two thousand years. Is it altogether unjusti- fiable to expect that, outside the confines of Egypt, the East will yet reward us with discoveries } similar to those made by Origen, the Kurds of Avroman (and possibly the peasant of Eregli) ?
Under other climatic conditions, more resembling those of Egypt, such a hope has yet better foundation, as is proved by a happy discovery made outside Egypt during the Great War. A tomb in the ruined monastery church of Hafir el-‘Audsha (south-west of Birseba, the ancient Beersheba, in southern Palestine) was found to contain portions of two papyrus documents? of the 6th century A.D. It appears, therefore, not impossible that still more papyri may come to light in Palestine. In the very dry climate of Salihiyeh, on the Euphrates, ancient texts on parchment have lasted down to the present day.®
The papyri are almost invariably non-literary in character. For instance, they include legal documents of all possible kinds: leases, bills and receipts, marriage-contracts, bills of divorce, wills, decrees issued by authority, denunciations, suings for the punishment of wrong-doers, minutes of judicial proceedings, tax-papers in great numbers. Then there are letters and notes, schoolboys’ exercise-books, magical texts, horoscopes, diaries, etc. As regards their contents these non-literary documents are as many-sided as life itself. Those in Greek, several thousand in number, cover a period of
1 It is possible, for example, that sacred writings which had received solemn burial will be rediscovered. Among the Jews at the present day rolls of the Law (Torah) that have become worn-out are kept at first in the Genizah (‘‘treasury’’), and are afterwards solemnly interred in earthen vessels (cf. the ceremony at Jerusalem observed by L. Schneller, Der Bote aus Zion, 10 (1894) p. 27 ff.), or in closed earthenware pipes (as at Prague, January 1921), cf. R. Katz, Vossische Zeitung, No. 22,14 Jan. 1921. This custom is certainly very old; according to Katz the interment at Prague in 1921 was the first for 532 years, 1.6. since 1389, It is not impossible that the texts found by Origen were buried Scriptures.
2 Cf. W. Schubart in Whegane 8 Stnat, p. 110 ff., and my “ Evangelischer
Wochenbrief ”’ III. No. 47/55, end of January 1921, p. 147. 3 Cf, Franz Cumont in the periodical called Syria” 4 (1923) p. 45.
THE PROBLEM 37
roughly a thousand years. The oldest go back to the early Ptolemaic period, i.e. the 3rd or even the 4th century B.c.!; the most recent bring us well into the Byzantine, period. All the chequered history of Hellenised and Romanised Egypt in that thousand years passes before our eyes on those tattered sheets.
The Greek documents are supplemented by large numbers of others in Aramaic,2? Demotic, Coptic,’ Arabic,‘ Latin,
1 A Greek literary papyrus of the 4th century B.c., viz. ‘‘ The Persians,” by the poet Timotheus, was edited by U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Leipzig, 1903. According to F. Blass (Gétting. gel. Anzeigen, 1903, p. 655), Grenfell is disposed to date the MS. between 330 and 280 B.c. Rubensohn found at Elephantine bundles of papyri, among which was one dated with the regnal year of Alexander’Aegus, the son of Alexander the Great, 311-310 B.c. That would make it the oldest Greek papyrus document yet discovered.—It is now No. 1 in the special publication Elephantine-Papyri bearbeitet von O. Rubensohn, Berlin, 1907.
2 Extremely important are the Aramaic Papyri discovered at Assuan, edited by A. H. Sayce with the assistance of A. E. Cowley and with appen- dices by W. Spiegelberg and Seymour de Ricci, London, 1906. They consist of ten large original documents (really from Elephantine), written in Aramaic by Jews of Upper Egypt in the time of the Persian kings Xerxes, Artaxerxes, and Darius, 471 or 470 to 411 B.c. Their eminent importance has been set forth in its linguistic, religious, and legal aspects by Th. Néldeke, Zeitschr. f. Assyriologie, 20, p. 130 ff.; Mark Lidzbarski, Deutsche Lit.-Ztg. 27 (1906) col. 3205 ff.; E. Schiirer, Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 32 (1907) col. 1 ff.; U. Wilcken, Archiv f. Papyrusforschung, 4, p. 228 ff.; Friedrich Schulthess, Géttingische gelehrte Anzeigen, 1907, p. 181 ff.; and many others. There is a handy edition by W. Staerk in Lietzmann’s Kleine Texte, Nos. 22, 23, Bonn, 1907, 71912, To these have now been added highly important new Aramaic docu- ments from Elephantine, cf. Eduard Sachau, Drei aramdische Papyrus- urkunden aus Elephantine, aus den Abhandlungen der Kgl. Preuss. Akademie der Wissenschaften 1907, Berlin, 1907; and W. Staerk, Aramaeische Urkunden zur Geschichte des Judentums im vi. und v. Jahrhundert vor Chr. sprachlich und sachlich erklart, in Lietzmann’s Kleine Texte, No. 32, Bonn, 1908. Cf. now the large edition by Ed. Sachau, Avamdische Papyrus und Ostraka aus einer jtidischen Militavkolonie zu Elephantine, Leipzig, 1911; Eduard Meyer,
-Zu den aram. Papyri von Elephantine, Berliner Sitzungsberichte 1911,
p. 1026 ff., and the same author's popular work, Der Papyrusfund von Elephan- tine, Leipzig 1912. Schiirer, shortly before his death, was able to give a detailed appreciation of the discoveries in his Gesch. des jiid. Volkes III.‘ Ὁ. 24 ff. A considerable literature is there noted. [Cowley’s Avamaic Papyri of.the Fifth Century B.C., comprising 811 the legible pre-Christian Aramaic papyri known, was published at Oxford in 1923. TR.]
3 I merely refer to the large collections of Coptic letters and documents, preserved at London, Vienna, Berlin, Strassburg, Heidelberg, etc. One of the most important of the literary papyri is the Heidelberg MS. of the Acta Pauli, discovered, pieced together with infinite pains and ingenuity, and then edited by Carl Schmidt (of Berlin), Veréffentlichungen aus der Heidelberger
[For continuation of notes see next page.
38 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Hebrew,! Persian [and even Gothic].2 Of the most ancient hieroglyphic papyri we here say nothing, but there should be no possibility of disagreement as to the value of those we hav€ mentioned for the scientific study of antiquity in the widest sense.2 They mean nothing less than the recon- stitution of a large portion of the life lived by the ancients. They tell their story of the past with a freshness, warmth, and sincerity such as we can boast of in no ancient writer and in but very few of the ancient inscriptions. The record handed down by the ancient authors is always, even in the
1 The best known is the Nash Papyrus, a copy of the Decalogue and a part of the Sh’ma [i.e. Deut. vi. 4 5.1 with a peculiar form of text, of the first or second century A.D. Cf. Norbert Peters, Die dlteste Abschvift dev zehn Gebote, der Papyrus Nash, untersucht, Freiburg i. B., 1905; and in connexion with this, C. Steuernagel, Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 31 (1906) col. 489 f.
2 [Among the papyri from Antinoé acquired by the Giessen University Library in 1908 was a small fragment of parchment (No. 651/20), part of a double leaf from a codex (palimpsest), containing the mutilated remains of Luke xxiii. 2-6, xxiv. 5-9 in Latin and Luke xxiii. 11-14, xxiv. 13-17 in the 4th cent. Gothic version of Wulfila (Ulfilas). This: proof of the existence of a Latin-Gothic parallel book of the gospels was a remarkable confirmation of Burkitt's theory of the Latin text of Codex Brixianus (Journal of Theological Studies I (1900) pp. 129-134). The Latin handwriting of the Giessen fragment is assigned to the early part of the 5th cent.; the Gothic, if of that date, is the earliest MS. extant in any Germanic language. It is not to be supposed that the MS. was written in Egypt; but readers of Kingsley’s “ Hypatia ’”’ will remember that Gothic soldiers visited Egypt, and this one find raises a faint hope that the rubbish-heaps may yield us yet more specimens of Gothic,—the philological value of which is that it is the oldest extant repre- sentative of the Germanic group of languages, to which our own English belongs. See P. Glaue and K. Helm, Das gotisch-lateinische Bibelfragment der Universitatsbibliothek zu Giessen, Zeitschrift fiir die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft 11 (1910) pp. 1-38, also separately in pamphlet form, Giessen, 1910; P. Glaue, Aus einer verlorenen Handschrift der Goten, Deutsche Rundschau 143 (1910) pp. 240-253; F. C. Burkitt, Journal of Theological Studies 11 (1910) p. 611 ff.; W. Streitberg, Die gotische Bibel, 2. Teil, Heidel- terg, 1910, pp. ix-xiv. TR.]
3 Cf. H. Idris Bell’s finely appreciative lecture on ‘‘ The Historical Value of Greek Papyri,’’ The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 6 (1920), p. 235 ff.
Continuation of notes to p. 37:—
Papyrus-Sammliung II., Leipzig, 1904 (a volume of text and a volume of plates), with a supplementary volume, ‘' Zusatze,” Leipzig, 1905. A smaller edition appeared at Leipzig, 1905; a new fragment in the Berliner Sitzungs- berichte 1909, p. 216 ff.
‘ The Arabic papyri, especially those of the first century of Islam, have been simply epoch-making as regards Islamic studies. Cf. C. H. Becker, Papyvi Schott-Reinhardt 1. (Veréffentlichungen aus der Heidelberger Papyrus-Sammlung 111), Heidelberg, 1906, p. 1 ff., and Becker’s other publications.
THE PROBLEM 39
best of cases, indirect, and has always been somehow or other touched up or toned down. The inscriptions are often cold and lifeless.1_ The papyrus sheet is far more living. We see the handwriting, the irregular characters, we see men. We gaze into the inmost recesses of individual lives.
Despite their unassuming simplicity the papyri have in- fused new blood into the veins of learning. Legal history in the first place, but afterwards the general history of cul- ture, and notably the history of language, have benefited thereby. And here, paradoxical-as it will seem to many, let me say that the non-literary papyri are of greater value to the historical inquirer than are the literary. We rejoice by all means when ancient books, or fragments of them, are recovered from the soil of Egypt, especially when they are lost literary treasures. But scientifically speaking the real treasure hidden in the field of Egypt is not so much of ancient art and literature as there lies buried, but all the ancient life, actual and tangible, that is waiting to be given to the world once more. It is regrettable, therefore, to see the merest scrap of an ancient. book treated as if it were something sacred—immediately published with notes and facsimile, evén if it be a fragment of some forgotten scribbler who deserved his fate—while on the other hand the non- literary items are often not even printed in full. Yet it may well happen that a solitary lease of no intrinsic interest contains the long-looked-for link completing the chain of development from some early Hellenistic form down to its representative in some dialect of modern Greek. Some- thing which an editor, with his eye bent on a special subject of interest to himself, perhaps suppressed as ‘“‘ unimportant,” may mean a priceless discovery to another.
It cannot be my task here to recite the long list of papyrus publications, great and small; I refer to the bibliographies mentioned above.2 Every year, however, increases the number of new editions. The name by which a papyrus is known may refer either to the place where it is now preserved
1 Cf. p. 24 above. 2 For the black years 1914 ff. I recommend Wilcken’s copious reports in the
Archiv fir Papyrusforschung, and especially H. I. Bell’s careful ‘ Biblio- graphy: Graeco-Roman Egypt A. Papyri 1914-15; 1915-19; 1919-20” in the Journal of Egyptian Archaeology, 3 (1916), 6 (1920), 7 (1921).
40 ‘ LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
(e.g. Berlin Documents; Cairo, London, Florence, Paris, Bale, Geneva, Strassburg, Leipzig, Giessen, Hamburg, Munich, Freiburg, Heidelberg, Chicago, etc. Papyri), the person to whom it belongs! (e.g. the Archduke Rainer’s Papyri, the Amherst Papyri, Reinach Papyri, εἰς), or to the place where it was found (e.g. Oxyrhynchus Papyri, Tebtunis Papyri, Hibeh Papyri, etc.). From the scientific point of view it would certainly be best to name the papyri after the place where found, and this will always be practicable where a great number of papyri have been found in the same place and kept in one collection. At any rate, when quoting 3 a particular papyrus one should never omit to state where and when it was written. The special excellence of these texts is due in no small degree to the fact that so many of them are dated to the very year and day of the month, and that it is neafly always certain where they came from. At some time in the indefinite future a Corpus (or perhaps several Corpora) Papyrorum may be called for. It would be im possible at present to undertake such a collection, for the discoveries show no signs of coming to a standstill. ’
The prevailing tendency being to overestimate the im- portance of whatever is literary, it is no wonder that theo- logians have congratulated themselves most of all on the recovery of parts of the Bible and early Christian books. We have, truly enough, every reason to be thankful that sources, and textual authorities are still forthcoming from such venerably early periods of:our faith. I have given
1 [Or belonged : the papyri collected by Lord Amherst of Hackney passed, after his death (16 Jan. 1909), into the possession of Mr. J. Pierpont Morgan, of New York, a few months or weeks before he died in 1913. The Archduke Rainer died in 1913. TR.]
2 [The Flinders Petrie Papyri were edited by J. P. Mahaffy and J. G. Smyly, .in three parts: Royal Irish Academy, Cunningham Memoirs, Nos. 8, 9, 11, Dublin, 1891-1905. TR.]
5 Ulrich Wilcken (Archiv fir Papyrusforschung, 1, oe 25 ff., 122 ἴ., 544 f.; 2, pp. 117, 385; 3, Pp. 113, 300) introduced a uniform system of abbrevia- tions for indicating the various editions. There is a complete list of these abbreviations in Edwin Mayser, Grammatih der griechischen Papyri aus dev Ptolemderzeit, Leipzig, 1906, p. vii. ff.; and later in Mitteis and Wilcken, Grundziige und Chrestomathie I. 1, p. xxv. ff. There all publications down ~ to 1912 are included. Later publications will be found in the Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung, and in Paul M. Meyer, Juri3tische Papyri, Berlin, 1920, p. vii. ff.
THE PROBLEM 41
elsewhere ! a list of the most important Greek fragments recovered down to 1903, including altogether about fifty fragments, large and small. The more recent publications enable us to add largely to the list. I will mention a few particulars.? Since 1903 Grenfell and Hunt* have pub- lished a second fragment of ‘‘ Logia,’’ and a fragment of a new gospel,* which was followed by yet another fragment of a gospel, of considerable size.5 Another fragment which
1 In the article mentioned which I contributed to the Realencyclopadte,3 XIV. p. 671 f. My Veréffentlichungen aus der Heidelberger Papyrus-Samm- lung I., which were there quoted while still in the press, appeared in 1905 (not 1904 as was expected). Cf. also the article on ‘‘ Papyri’’ by Kenyon.
3 Cf. also Adolf Harnack, Die Chronologie der altchristlichen Literatuy bis Eusebius 11., Leipzig, 1904, p. 179 ff., and the serial reports by Carl Schmidt (of Berlin) in the Archiv fir Papyrusforschung. A creditable collection of the oldest literary and non-literary Christian texts on papyri was contributed to the Patrologia Orientalis, IV. 2, by Charles Wessely, ‘‘ Les plus anciens monuments du Christianisme écrits sur papyrus textes grecs édités, traduits et commentés,’’’ Paris [1907]. Cf. also A. Bludau, Biblische Zeitschrift, 4 (1906), p. 25 ff.; Hermann Miiller, 7b¢d. 6 (1908), p. 25 ff.; and Caspar René Gregory, Die griechischen Handschriften des Neuen Testaments, Leipzig, 1908, PP. 45-7.
8 The Oxyrhynchus Papyri, Part IV. No. 654; cf. my article “ Zur Text- Rekonstruktion der neuesten Jesusworte aus Oxyrhynchos,” Supplement No. 162 to the Allgemeine Zeitung (Munich), 18 July, 1904, translated as an Appendix (No. II) to the present book; E. Preuschen, Antilegomena,? Gieszen, 1905, pp. 23 ff., 119 ff.; E. Klostermann, Apocrypha III., Bonn, 1904, p. 17 ff.; J. H. A. Michelsen in Teyler’s Theologisch Tijdschrift, 1905, p. 160 f.—I may be allowed one remark concerning the first ‘‘ Logia ’”’ fragment of 1897. The last clause (‘colon’) of Logion No. 4, σχίσον τὸ ξύλον κἀγὼ ἐκεῖ εἰμί, ‘cleave the wood and I am there,” which has been so much discussed [and has inspired poets: cf. Sir William Watson’s poem ‘‘ The Unknown God,” and H. van Dyke's hymn, beginning ‘‘ They who tread the path of labour.’’ Tr.], has a remarkable parallel (not yet pointed out, I believe) in the Gospel of Thomas, ch. x. The boy Jesus heals a wood-cutter whose axe had fallen and severely injured his foot, and dismisses him with the words, ἀνάστα viv oxile τὰ ξύλα καὶ μνημόνευέ μου, “ Arise now: cleave the pieces of wood and remember Me.” ([Cf. M. R. James, The Apocryphal New Testament, Oxford, 1924, pp. 27, 52. TR.] This parallel suggests that the Logion is a word of consolation for those engaged in dangerous work. William A. Curtis gives a different explanation in The Expositor, June 1913, p. 481 ff.
4 The Oxyrhynchus Papyri, Part IV. No. 655. Also published separately by Grenfell and Hunt with the second “ Logia” fragment: New Sayings of Jesus and Fragment of a Lost Gospel, London, 1904. See also Preuschen, Antilegomena,? p. 26; Klostermann, Apocrypha III. p. 20; [Μ. R. James, The Apocryphal New Testament, Oxford, 1924, p. 28. TR.] Michelsen, op. cit. p. 161 ff., successfully restores a portion of this hitherto unidentified fragment.
5 Cf. the announcement in The Times, May 14, 1906. Grenfell and Hunt very kindly showed me the original at Oxford (Oct. 1906). It is a parch-
42 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
the two distinguished explorers also consider to be a portion of a gospel,! is perhaps rather to be looked on as part of a commentary or a sermon.? The Second Part of the Amherst Papyri contains a large fragment of ‘‘ The Shepherd of Hermas ” and several Septuagint fragments, one of which has only been identified since the book appeared.? The Fourth Part of the Oxyrhynchus Papyri gave us, besides the texts mentioned above, a good-sized fragment of the Septuagint Genesis,‘ and a still larger piece of the Epistle to the Hebrews,5 which was found written on the back of an Epitome of Livy. The Sixth Part also presented us with new fragments,* and the abundance increased with
ment fragment from Oxyrhynchus, published in the Oxyrhynchus Papyri, Part V. No. 840; and separately, Fragment of an Uncanonical Gospel from Oxyrhynchus, London, 1908. The fragment has already called forth a copious literature. Cf. Henry Barclay Swete, Zwei neue Evangelienfragmente, Bonn, 1908 (Lietzmann’s Kleine Texte, No. 31); E. Preuschen, Zeitschrift fi die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft, 1908, p. 1 ff.; L. Blau, ibid., p. 204 ff.; A. Marmorstein, ibid., 1914, p. 336 ff. ; [M. R. James, A pocryphal New Testament, p. 29f. Tr.] Swete also prints the so-called Freer Logion, which has likewise given rise to a whole literature. [A 4th or 5th century codex of the Gospels, on vellum, was found in a tomb at Akhmim, the ancient Panopolis, in Upper Egypt, in 1907, and acquired by Charles Lang Freer of Detroit, who afterwards presented it to the University of Washington. The Logion forms part of the reputed conclusion of St. Mark (between verses 14 and 15 of ch. xvi.); it is extant in no other Greek MS., but the preliminary words of the apostles were known from a quotation by Jerome in Latin. An English version will be found in Dr. James Moffatt’s ‘‘ The New Testament: a new translation ” at the right position in St. Mark; also in M. R. James, Apocryphal New Testa- ment, p. 34. TR.] Besides the works of H. A. Sanders, A. Harnack, and C. R. Gregory, mentioned by Swete, cf. among others Hugo Koch, Biblische Zeitschrift 6 (1908) p. 266 ff.; [H. A. Sanders, The Washington Manuscript of the Four Gospels, University of Michigan Studies, 1912].
1 Catalogue général des antiquités égyptiennes du Musée du.Caive, Vol. X. (Nos. 10,001~10,869 Greek Papyri), Oxford, 1903, No. 10,735; Preuschen. Antilegomena,? p. 114 f. ᾿
2 Cf. my article, ‘‘Das angebliche Evangelien-Fragment von Kairo,” Archiv fir Religionswissenschaft, 7, p. 387, translated as an Appendix (No. III) to this book.
3 Namely the fragment after No. 191, Ὁ. 201. It contains LXX Isaiah lviii. 11-14. See the Supplement to the Allgemeine Zeitung (Munich), No. 251, 31 October, rgor.
* No. 656; now cited as US by the editors of the great Cambridge Septua- gint (Alan England Brooke and Norman McLean).
5 No. 657. ;
ὁ Fragments of the LXX Psalter (No. 845), LXX Amos (No. 846), St. John’s Gospel (No. 847), Revelation (No. 848), the Acts of Peter (No. 849), the Acts of John (No. 850); and a fragment not yet identified (No. 851).
THE PROBLEM 43
each new volume of this wonderfully rich collection.! Other Biblical fragments on papyrus, some of them very old, of which I have received information by letter, remain un- published, e.g. a large 4th-century MS. of Genesis obtained by Carl Schmidt (of Berlin). Adolf Harnack has announced 3 the discovery of a fragment of Ignatius by the same Carl Schmidt. For considerable fragments of Irenaeus preserved at Jena we are indebted to Hans Lietzmann,* who has also published a Jena fragment of the Psalter.5 Carl Schmidt (of Berlin) has edited two important early Christian prayers δ belonging to the Berlin Museum. Several ancient Christian fragments in the Strassburg collection of papyri have been published by O. Plasberg.? Anton Swoboda thinks he has discovered in one of the papyri of the ‘“‘ Fayim Towns” volume fragments of a Gnostic (Naassenic) psalm about Christ’s descent into hell. P. Glaue and A. Rahlfs® have published fragments of a Greek translation of the Samaritan
1 Part XV. (1922) reached me by the kindness of the Egypt Exploration Society and the editors. The gem of this portion of the collection is No.1786, the oldest known fragment of an early Christian hymn, temp. Diocletian, with musical notation! [Part XVI appeared in 1924. TR.]
2 See the Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 33 (1908), col. 360.
3 Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 31 (1906), col. 596 f.
4 Nachrichten der Kgl. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Géttingen, Phil.-hist. Klasse, 1912, p. 292 ff.
5 Neutestamentliche Studien Georg Heinvici dargebracht, Leipzig, 1914, p. 60 ff.
6 Tbid., Ὁ. 66 ff.
7 Archiv fir Papyrusforschung, 2, p. 217 ff.: a piece with proverbs, not yet identified, and probably quite new; a fragment of 2-Samuel xv. and xvi., Septuagint; a parchment fragment of the 5th century a.D. with remains of a Greek translation, of Genesis xxv. 19-22 and xxvi. 3,4. This last piece, quoted as A, in the great Cambridge Septuagint, is very important. It presents a text remarkably at variance with the LXX but approximating to the Hebrew—not, however, a Samaritan text, it would seem, cf. Rahlfs, Nachrichten der Kgl. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Géttingen, I9II, p. 266—and its variants are remarkable for the occurrence four times over of σπορά, a reading not hitherto recorded, instead of σπέρμα (xxvi. 3, 4). We may conclude with great probability that this is a direct protest against St. Paul’s celebrated insistence on the singular σπέρμα (Gal. iii. 16), and that the papyrus is therefore the survival of a post-Christian, hitherto unknown Jewish revision of the LXX or new translation. Graecus Venetus, a late and probably Jewish writer (ed. O. Gebhardt, Lipsiae, 1875), has σπόρος in most of the Messianic passages of Genesis; in xxvi. 3, 4 he has σπόρος three times and σπέρμα once.
8. Cf. Wiener Studien 27 (1905), Part 2.
® Nachr. der Gesellsch. der Wissenschaften zu Géttingen, 1911, pp. 167 ff. and 263 ff.
44 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Pentateuch (on parchment). I cannot, in the present state of our libraries, attempt to enumerate the abundant dis- coveries of the last few years; a precise bibliography of all those relating to the Greek Bible and early Church history remains, however, a pressing need.
Of great importance too are the Coptic fragments of Biblical, Gnostic, and other early Christian writings, among which I have already mentioned the Heidelberg ‘ Acta Pauli.” 2 They are very numerous,’ and have lately been reinforced by two extensive fragments of translations of the first Epistle of Clement, now at Berlin’ and Strassburg,® and by a beautifully preserved MS. of the Proverbs of Solo- mon.® The conversations of Jesus with the disciples after the Resurrection, contained in a Coptic papyrus, for which we are mainly indebted to Carl Schmidt’ of Berlin, are his- torically the most valuable of these discoveries. Graeco- Sahidic fragments of the Psalms, of considerable extent, have been published by Carl Wessely ὃ from the collection of papyri belonging to the Archduke Rainer. An entirely new field has been opened up by the discovery, also due to
1 There are excellent lists in Schubart, Einfiuhrung in die Papyruskunde, Ῥ. 473 1., 475, 481. Cf. also ἐδίά., pp. 174-183. For the Sayings of Jesus (Logia) I refer at least to the great edition by H. G. Evelyn White, The Sayings of Jesus, Cambridge, 1920; cf. A. von Harnack, Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 46 (1921), col. 4f.
2 Page 37, n. 3 above.
3 I had no intention of enumerating all the earlier publications. Budge’s publication, the omission of which was noticed by J. Leipoldt (Theologisches Literaturblatt 29 [1908] col. 561) was not unknown to me.
4 Karl [= Carl] Schmidt, Sitzungsberichte der Kgl. Preuss. Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin), 1907, p. 154 ff., and his edition, Der erste Clemens- brief in altkoptischer Ubersetzung (Texte und Untersuchungen, Dritte Reihe, Zweiter Band, Heft 1), Leipzig, 1908.
5 Sitzungsberichte, 1907, p. 158 £.
6 Now at Berlin, tbid., p. 155.
1 Gesprdache Jesu mit seinen Jiingeyn nach dey Auferstehung. Ein katholisch- apostolisches Sendschreiben des 2. Jahrh., Leipzig, 1919.
8 Sitzungsberichte der Kais. Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien, Philosophisch-Historische Klasse, Vol. 155, first article, Wien, 1907. [A papyrus codex, written before 350 a.p., and containing Jonah .and large portions of Deuteronomy and Acts, was "published by the British Museum, Coptic Biblical Texts in the Dialect of Upper Egypt, 1912. It is a remarkably early specimen of a Biblical MS. of such size. In 1923, Guy Brunton dis- covered an early Coptic papyrus codex (6. 400 A.D.) of St. John’s Gospel, enclosed in a jar (cf. p. 34, n. 3 above), in an old Christian cemetery at Qau-el-Kebir, about 30 miles.south of Assiut. It was edited by Sir Herbert Thompson for the British School of Archaeology in Egypt, 1924. Tr.]
THE PROBLEM 45
Carl Schmidt (Berlin), of the first fragments of Christian literature in the language of ancient Nubia.!
The non-literary papyri also contain much that is of direct value in the study of Biblical and Christian antiquities. In the first place we have the Aramaic and Greek documents which from the 5th century B.c. until long after the estab- lishment of the Empire make mention of Jewish inhabitants in all parts of Egypt. These furnish statistics of that cos- mopolitan Judaism ? which was such a help to the Christian mission. Next come the papyri which enable us to fix the chronology of the Egyptian Praefect Munatius Felix, and thereby the chronology of an important treatise by Justin Martyr, or which make it possible to determine the site of hitherto uncertain Egyptian places mentioned in early Christian texts. The discoveries have presented us with precious original documents of the time of the Christian
1 Heinrich Schafer und Karl [= Carl] Schmidt, Sitzungsberichte der Kgl. Preuss. Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin), 1906, p. 774 ff., and 1907, p. 602f. They are parchment fragments from Upper Egypt, but were no doubt found together with papyri. It is nearly always so with Egyptian parchment fragments. New writings in Nubian apart from these have since come to light; cf. F. Ll. Griffith’s large and comprehensive treatise, ‘“ The Nubian Texts of the Christian Period,’’ Abhandlungen der Kgl. Preuss- ischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, philos.-histor. Klasse, 1913, No. 8, Berlin, 1913. I gave a specimen of these texts in German in a sketch entitled “Die Kraft des Kreuzes, Altchristliche Enkomien,” in Die Hilfé, 1 April, 1915; in English, ‘‘ The Power of the Cross,’’ The Expository Times, Vol. 32, No. 7, April 1921, p. 299 ff.
2 The Jewish papyri mentioned in my first list (No. 14) in the Realencyclo- pddie® have been the subject of several investigations since I wrote about
‘them in the Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 23 (1898), col. 602 ff. I would refer especially to E. von Dobschiitz, Jews and Antisemites in Ancient Alexandria, The American’ Journal of Theology, 1904, p. 728 ff.; F. Stahelin, Dey Antisemi- tismus des Altertums, Basel, 1905; Aug. Bludau, Juden und Judenverfol- gungen im alten Alexandria, Mimster i. W., 1906; and most particularly to U. Wilcken, Zum alexandrinischen Antisemitismus (Vol. XXVII. of the Abhandlungen der phil.-hist. Klasse der Kgl. Sachs. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften, No. XXIII.), Leipzig, 1909 (also Chrestomathie I. τ, Ὁ. 44 f.). New texts of this kind are the Oxyrhynchus Papyri Nos. 1089 and 1242, on which see the fruitful essays by Wilh. Weber, Hermes 50 (1915), pp. 47-92, and A. von Premerstein, Hermes 57 (1922), pp. 266-316; also A. von Premer- stein, ‘‘Zu den sogenannten alexandrinischen Martyrakten,” Philologus, Supplementband 16, Heft 2, Leipzig, 1923. [H.I. Bell, Jews and Christians in Egypt. The Jewish Troubles in Alexandria and the Athanasian Controversy illustrated by texts from Greek Papyri in the British Museum, 1924. All but one of the papyri are 4th century. Amony the correspondence of Pap(h)nutius (cf. p. 47, ἢ. 3 below) there is a possible autograph of St. Athanasius. Tr.]
46 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
persecutions. We have numerous /ibelli (nearly 40, I should now estimate) issued to Christian Jibellatici (or, as U. Wilcken suggested to me in a letter of r March, 1902, in some cases no doubt to falsely suspected pagans 1) at the time of the Decian persecution,? and then there is the letter of the Christian. presbyter Psenosiris in the Great Oasis to the presbyter Apollo on behalf of a banished Christian woman.2 Highly remarkable is a Christian original
1 Cf. also Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung, 3, p. 311. [Libelli were official certificates of the satisfactory performance of pagan sacrifices by the certificate- holders. TR.]
2 In 1909 I was only able to mention 5: No.1 published by Fr. Krebs, Sitzungsberichte der Kgl.-Preuss. Ak. d. Wiss. (Berlin), 1893, pp. 1007- 1014; No. 2 published by K. Wessely, Anzeiger der Kaiserl. Ak. d. W. zu Wien, Phil.-hist. Klasse, XX XI. 1894, pp. 3-9; for No. 3 cf. Seymour de Ricci, Bulletin Papyrologique, Revue des Etudes Grecques, 1901, p. 203, and U. Wilcken, Archiv fir Papyrusforschung, 1, p. 174; No. 4 published by Grenfell and Hunt, The Oxyrhynchus Papyri, No. 658; No. 5 published by Wessely in the Patrologia Orientalis, IV. 2, pp. 113-115. Cf. also G. Milligan, The Expository Times, Vol. 20, No. 4 (Jan. 1909). A. Bludau’s article in Der Katholik, 88, 9, I know only from the Deutsche Lit.-Ztg. 29 (1908), col. 2453. Since 1909 a number of new /ibelli have been discovered and published. Paul M. Meyer, ‘‘ Die Libeili aus der Decianischen Christen- verfolgung " (Appendix to the Abhandlungen der Berliner Ak. d. W., 1910), Berlin, 1910, published 19 new /ibelli belonging to the Municipal Library at Hamburg and reprinted those that were already known, making 24 in all. In his work, Griechische Texte aus Agypten (I. Papyri des Neutest. Seminars der Univ. Berlin, II. Ostraka der Sammlung Deissmann), Berlin, 1916, p. 75 ff., he added three more, which I had obtained for the New Testament Seminar at Berlin. Some more /ibelli from the same find were acquired by the John Rylands Library at Manchester through my agency; some of them have been published in the Catalogue of the Greek Papyri in the John Rylands Library, Vol. II.'(1915). Οὗ. also The Oxyrhynchus Papyri XII. No. 1464, and Gerhard Plaumann in Amtliche Berichte aus den Kgl. Kunstsammlungen, 34 (1913), p. 117 f£.—A remarkable analogy to these Libelli is furnished by the certificates of confession and profession given to Lutherans in the 17th century, cf. Theol. Rundschau, 11 (1908), p. 430. (" Tokens’ were given before the Reformation to persons after confession, empowering them to be admitted to Communion, a practice continued in Scotland in the ‘‘ Com- munion Tokens ” issued to church-members qualified to receive the Sacrament. See the New English Dictionary, s.v. Token sb. 10, and Token-money. TR.] '
3 Papyrus 713 in the British Museum, edited with commentary in my little book, Ein Original-Dokument aus dey Diocletianischen Christenver- folgung, Tabingen und Leipzig, 1902; translated into English under the title The Epistle of Psenosivis, London, 1902 (Cheap Edition, 1907). Cf. also P. Franchi de’ Cavalieri, Una lettera del tempo della persecuzione Dio- clezianéa, Nuovo Bullettino di Archeologia Cristiana, 8 (1902), pp. 15-25. The late Albrecht Dieterich proposed, in the Gétting. gel. Anz. 1903, pp. 550- 555, an interpretation of an important passage of the letter differing greatly from my own, and to this I replied in a monthly periodical, Die Studierstube, 1 (1903), pp. 532-540. The whole problem received detailed treatment once
THE PROBLEM 47
letter 1 sent from Rome to the Fayfim at some time during the last thirty years of the 3rd century, which-is probably the oldest original Christian letter at present known. There follows a long series of Christian letters, from the 4th century onwards, which have now been published some time, but deserve, I think, more notice than they have yet received. They are manifestos from those circles of Christendom concerning which there are scarcely any other sources of information available? The extensive correspondence of Abinnaeus should be specially mentioned in this connexion.? Even the legal documents of the Byzantine period, 6.6. the church inventories, which are not yet all published, contain many details of interest. Certain points, such as the palaeographical history of the so-called monogram of Christ, .£, receive fresh illumination from the papyri.4 In an article entitled “‘ Pagan and Christian in Egypt,” > Ulrich Wilcken published a number of new things, two of which deserve special mention: an amulet with an interesting
more from August Merk, S.J., in the Zeitschr. fiir kathol. Theologie, 29 (1905), PP. 724-737, due attention being given to the copious literature that had appeared in the interval. Cf. Otto Bardenhewer, Geschichte der altkirch- lichen Litevatur, I1., Freiburg i. B., 1903, p. 218 f., and Adolf Harnack, Die Chronologie der altchristl. Lit. II. p. 180, both of whom treat of the letter as part of Christian “‘ literature,” which strictly speaking is not correct; Pierre Jouguet, Revue des Etudes Anciennes, 7 (1905), p. 254f.; U. Wilcken, Archiv f. Papyrusforschung, 2 p. 166, 3 p. 125, 4 p. 204f.; F. Buecheler, Rhein. Museum, New Series 61 (1906), p. 627; C. Wessely in the Patrologia Orientalis, IV. 2, pp. 125-135; Paul Viereck, Jahresbericht iiber die Fort- schritte der klassischen Altertumswissenschaft, 131 (1906), p. 124 ff.; Wilcken, Chrestomathie (Vol. I. 2 of the whole work), No. 127 (p. 154f., cf. p. vi.). Text and facsimile of the letter will. be found in Chapter III. below (p. 213 ff.).
1 The Amherst Papyri, I. No. 3a, p. 28 ff. (facsimile II. plate 25); cf. Adolf Harnack, Sitzungsberichte der Kgl. Preuss. Ak. der Wissensch. zu Berlin, 1900, p. 987 ff. In Chapter III. (p. 205 ff.) I give a facsimile of the letter with an attempt to restore and interpret it.
2 Cf. now the fine collection of 44 early Christian letters by Giuseppe Ghedini, Lettere Cristiane dai pupiri gvect del III e IV secolo, Milano, 1923.
3 Further particulars as to Abinnaeus in my edition of the ancient Christian letter of Justinus to Papnuthius (cf. p. 45, n. 2 above), Verdffentlichungen aus der Heidelberger Papyrus-Sammlung I. pp. 94-104, and in Chapter III. (p. 216 ff.) below.
4 The theological importance of some of the papyrus publications is pointed out in the Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 1896, col. 609 ff.; 1898, col. 628 ff.; 1go1, col. 69 ff.; 1903, col. 592 ff.; 1906, col. 547£.; Supplement to the Allg. Zeitung (Munich) 1900, No. 250, and rgor, No. 251.
δ᾽ Archiv fir Papyrusforschung, 1, p. 396 ff.
48 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
text of the Lord’s Prayer,! and a petition of Appion, bishop of Syene, to the Emperors Theodosius II. and Valentinian III.2. This article, by the way, is a model example of the sort of commentary that is called for by such texts. The last publication to be mentioned here is that by Lietzmann ὃ of a curious text which still presents many unsolved riddles. -
It will be admitted that our knowledge of Christian an- tiquity has been very considerably enriched by these literary and non-literary Christian papyri from Egypt. Our subject, however, is chiefly concerned with the non-Christian texts and the great indirect value that they possess for Bible students. The following chapters will pursue that subject in detail. In these introductory observations, however, we may remark that, at a time when Greek papyri were still among the rare curiosities of a few museums, Heinrich Wilhelm Josias Thiersch realised their value for Septuagint philology. Even before him Friedrich Wilhelm Sturz > had made use of the Charta Borgiana ὃ (a papyrus, prac- tically the first,’ brought to Europe in 1778) in studying the Alexandrian Old Testament, and had cited it, for instance, to explain the word ἀπάτωρ, “ without father,” in Hebrews vii. 3.8
Of late years the papyri have been used by almost all the Biblical scholars whom I named above when speaking of the inscriptions. Apart from the grammatical studies incorporated later in his ‘‘ Grammar,” James Hope Moulton made valuable lexical contributions,? which were afterwards
1 Archiv fir Papyrusforschung, I, p. 431 ff. Another text of the Lord’s
Prayer on papyrus: Papyri Iandanaz 1. (ed. E. Schaefer, Lipsiae, 1912), No. 6. ‘ 4 ae p. 398 ff. and 4, p. 172. Wilcken’s placing of this petition in the reign of Theodosius II. and Valentinian III. is confirmed by the praescript of the letter addressed by these Emperors to John of Antioch, Migne, Patro- logia Graeca, 65, col. 880; there too Theodosius is placed first.
3 Papyrus Jenensis, No. 1, Zeitschrift fir wissenschaftliche Theologie, 50 (New Series 15), 1907, p. 149 ff.
4 De Pentateuchi versione Alexandrina libri tres, Exrlangae, 1841. 5 De Dialecto Macedonica et Alexandrina liber, Lipsiae, 1808.
5 Charta Papyvacea Graece scripta Musei Borgiani Velityis . . . edita a Nicolao Schow, Romae, 1788. 7 See p. 31, n. 1 above. 8 Op. cit., p. 146 1.
® Notes from the Papyri, The Expositor, Apel 1go1, February 1903, December 1903.
THE PROBLEM 49
continued in collaboration with George Milligan. The papyri have been successfully appealed to in linguistic problems by J. de Zwaan in his article? on Mark xiv. 41, and in his Dutch edition of Burton’s Syntax of New Testa- ment Moods and Tenses,’ and Wilhelm Heitmiiller 4 did the same before him. By means of the papyri J. Rendel Harris ὅ has advanced the exegesis of the New Testament Epistles, and H. Hauschildt ὁ the history of the title ““ presbyteros.”’ Hermann Miiller 7 and Alfred Wikenhauser 8 have also made a beginning with such studies. Hans Lietzmann made industrious use of the papyri in his Commentaries, already mentioned, and made the Greek papyri available for theo- logical class-work by publishing his little book of texts.° Willoughby C. Allen did not neglect the papyri in his Com- mentary on St. Matthew,!° and George Milligan has shown their value with respect to the earliest history of the New Testament in general."
As a matter of course, the Greek philologists above men- tioned in connexion with the inscriptions often compare
1 Lexical Notes from the Papyri, The Expositor, January 1908 ff. The great lexical work of the two collaborators has been mentioned above, p. 21, n. 4.
2 The Text and Exegesis of Mark xiv. 41, and the Papyri, The Expositor, December 1905.
3 Syntaxis der Wijzen en Tijden in het Grieksche Nieuwe Testament, Haarlem, 1906. The inscriptions are also used here and in Heitmiiller.
4 “Im Namen Jesu”: eine sprach- und religionsgeschichtliche Unter- suchung zum N. T., speziell zur altchristlichen Taufe, Géttingen, 1903; cf. Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 29 (1904), col. 199 ff.
5 A Study in Letter Writing, The Expositor, September 1898; Epaphro- ditus, Scribe and Courier, ibid., December 1898; The Problem of the Address in the Second Epistle of John, zbid., March 1gor.
8 Zeitschrift fiir die meutestementliche Wissenschaft, 4 (1903), p. 235 ff.; cf. Max L. Strack, ibd., p. 213 ff., and before that my Bibelstudien, p. 153 f., and Neue Bibelstudien, p. 60 ff. [= Bible Studies, pp. 154, 233].
7 Zum Pastor Hermae, Theologische Quartalschrift, 1908, Ὁ. 89 ff.
8. Ποταμοφόρητος Apk. 12, 15 u.a., Biblische Zeitschrift, 6 (1908), p. 171; 7 (1909), p. 48; ἐνώ κατενώπιον, ibid., 8 (1909), p. 263 ff.; Zum Worterbuch der griechischen Bibel, zbid., 13 (1915), p. 221.
ἢ Griechische Papyri, No. 14 of the Kleine Texte fir theologische Vorles- ungen und Ubungen, Bonn, 1905, #1910. 10 Edinburgh, 1907.
11 The New Testament Documents, theiy Origin and Early History, London, 1913. [Henry G. Meecham, Light from Ancient Letters: private correspond- ence in the non-literary papyri of Oxyrhynchus of the first four centuries, and its bearing on N.T. language and thought, London, 1923, is an attempt to present in summary fashion the results of comparative study under the headings of vocabulary, grammar, form, and subject matter. Tr.]
50 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
the Septuagint and the New Testament with the evidence of the papyri whenever they happen to discuss the inter- national Greek of the Imperial and earlier age. The most important achievements with regard specially to papyrology are those of Edwin Mayser ! and Wilhelm Crénert.2_ Mayser’s work has now found a Biblical counterpart in R. Helbing’s Septuagint Grammar. .
(c) The OstrRaca, constituting the third main group ® of texts, are closely allied to the papyri. We approach with them a branch of learning that is still quite young, a branch which to begin with relied on two men only for its main support. One of them, Ulrich Wilcken, laid the founda- tions with his brilliant work on Greek Ostraca from Egypt
“and Nubia*; the other, W. E. Crum, by the publication of his great collection of Christian ostraca,> has added fresh material. Addressed primarily to Coptologists, Crum’s book
1 Grammatik dev griechischen Papyri aus der Ptolemaerzeit mit Einschluss der gleichzeitigen Ostraka und der in Agypten verfassten Inschriften; Laut- und Wortlehre, Leipzig, 1906 (cf. Stanislaus Witkowski, Deutsche Literatur- Zeitung, 30 [1909] col. 347 ff.). The Syntax is to follow later. Small preliminary studies of Mayser’s had come earlier. Other papers by Wit- kowski, Volker, Kuhring, etc., will be found noted in Hohlwein’s Bibliography and in my summaries in the Theol. Rundschau, 1 (1897-8), p. 463 ff., 5 (1902), p. 58 ff., 9 (1906), p. 210°ff., and 15 (1912), p. 339 ff. ᾿
2 Memoria Gvaeca Herculanensis cum titulorum Aegypti papyrorum codicum denique testimoniis comparatam proposuit Guilelmus Crénert, Lipsiae, 1903. ᾿
3 What is said of the inscriptions on stone, the papyri, and the ostraca, applies also mutatis mutandis to the remaining smaller groups (wooden tablets, wax tablets, etc.).
4 Griechische Ostraka aus Agypten und Nubien: ein Beitrag zur antiken Wirtschaftsgeschichte, in two Books, Leipzig, 1899. Remarks additional to the same by Paul Viereck, Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung, 1, p. 450 ff. The scanty previous literature is noted by Wilcken, I. p. 56 f.
5 Coptic Ostraca from the Collections of the Egypt Explovation Fund, the Caivo Museum, and others. Special extra publication of the Egypt Explora- tion Fund, London, 1902. For the important theological aspects of the book see especially the review by Erwin Preuschen, Byzantinische Zeitschrift, 1906, p. 641 ff. A further publication to be considered is H. R. Hall, Coptic and Greek Texts of the Christian Period from Ostraca, Stelae, etc., in the British Museum, London, 1905. Further information in the Archiv fir Papyrusfor- schung, 4, p. 247 ff. Hieratic, demotic, Greek, and Coptic ostraca from Egypt were published by Alan H. Gardiner, Herbert Thompson, and J. G. Milne, Theban Ostvaca, Parts I.-IV., Oxford, 1913; cf. G. Méller, Deutsche Literaturzeitung, 1914, No. 12, col. 731 £., who specially praises Thompson’s treatment of the demotic ostraca, and ranks it beside Wilcken’s pioneer work on the Greek ostraca.
THE PROBLEM 51
is nevertheless of importance to Greek scholars and theo- logians. More recently Paul M. Meyer} has among others done masterly work in this field.
The question ‘‘ What are ostraca?” is easily answered. They are pieces of broken pottery, on which something has been written. “ Why were they so neglected in the past? ”’ is a more difficult question.2, I am reminded of a sentence in one of Pastor von Bodelschwingh’s annual reports of a scrap-collecting organisation for the support of the Bethel charities near Bielefeld. ‘‘ Nothing is absolutely worth- less,” he says, “‘ except bits of broken earthenware and the fag-ends of cigars,” and the opinion seems to have been shared by the peasants of Egypt, at least so far as bits of pottery were concerned. They rummaged among ancient ruins, and whenever they came across such pitiable objects as bits of earthenware vessels, they threw them away at once. Many a European with a scholar’s training must have been quite convinced that ancient potsherds were valueless, even when there was writing visible on them 4; otherwise one cannot understand why they were to all intents and purposes ignored by research for so long a time, comparatively. After all, what can there be more pitiful than an earthen potsherd? The prophet in his emphatic irony could think of no image more apt to describe man’s nothingness than that of a potsherd among potsherds.®
1 Griechische Texte aus Agypten. I. Papyri des Neutestamentlichen Seminars der Universitat Berlin. II. Ostraka der Sammlung Deissmann, Berlin, 1916. The benefactor of the Berlin New Testament Seminar who helped to make this publication possible, and whom we were then not allowed to name, was, as I am bound gratefully to acknowledge now after his decease, our venerable colleague Professor Johann Imelmann, of Berlin.
2 In what follows I am making use of my notice of Wilcken’s Ostvaka in the Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 26 (1901), col. 65 ff. Many details will be found there which are not mentioned here.
8 Neunter Jahresbericht der Brockensammlung der Anstalt Bethel bei Bielefeld. [Friedrich von Bodelschwingh, 1831-1910, was a kind of German Dr. Barnardo. He was a member of the Prussian Diet, and received honorary
degrees from Halle and Miinster in 1884 and 1908 in recognition of his great social work. TR.]
4 As late as 1819 an architect named Gau found ‘an innumerable quantity ᾿ of inscribed ostraca at Dakkeh in Nubia. He made drawings of several, kept two, and threw the rest away as needless ballast! Cf. Wilcken, Griechische Ostraka, I. p. 20.
5 Isaiah xlv. 9: ‘‘,Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker! a potsherd
among the potsherds of the earth!” (R.V.)
52 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
In the time of the ancients potsherds were not thrown away as useless for ever. From the rubbish-heaps they not unfrequently made their way once more to the humble homes of the proletariat, there to be used as writing material. Few of us, however, realised this fact until Wilcken ‘pub- lished his book on the subject. Of course in our schooldays we had heard of the judgment of Clisthenes, but in such a way that most of us, if asked, would have said that ostracism was the Athenian statesman’s own invention, and that he caused small tablets of earthenware to be made specially for the people to record their votes. As a matter of fact, many of the ostraca employed for voting have been dis- covered at Athens,! and some at least of them are obviously pieces of broken vessels.
Wilcken goes on to show most convincingly that the habit of writing on ostraca must have been in force at Athens in the sixth century B.c. at latest. The potsherd was in fact highly popular as writing material throughout the ancient Mediterranean world. We now possess an abundance of very ancient ostraca inscribed with writing in ink. The unity of the civilisation prevailing in East. and West in ancient times is shown also in this, I will mention but a few examples. The American excavations conducted by George A. Reisner at Samaria have brought to light some 75, ostraca with short texts in ancient Hebrew 2 of the gth century B.c. A large ostracon from Assur with a long political letter in ancient Aramaic of the 7th century B.c. has been published by Mark Lidzbarski.2 Among the Jewish texts in Aramaic of the 5th century B.c. found at Elephantine* there are also some ostraca. As _ regards
1 Wilcken, Ostraka, I. pp. 4f. and 820. More recently A. Brueckner has reported the discovery of 44 new ostraca of the 5th century z.c. during his excavations outside the Porta Sacra at Athens. They are now in the Dipylon Museum. The writing seems in most cases to be scratched on the ostraca. Cf. Sitzungsberichte der Archdolog. Gesellschaft zu Berlin No. 36 (1911), p. 10 (also Deutsche Literaturzeitung, 1911, No. 11, col. 686).
2 Cf. the provisional accounts by David G. Lyon, Harvard Theological Review, Jan. 1911; R. Kittel, Theol. Lit.-Blatt rg11, No. 3; G. Hdlscher, Mitteilungen und Nachrichten des Deutschen Protestanten-Vereins 1911, No. 2, p. 22 ff. The texts are of unique importance, in spite of their apparently scanty contents.
8 Ausgrabungen dey Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft in Assur, E.: Inschriften. V.: Altaramdaische Urkunden, Leipzig, 1921, pp. 5-15.
4 Cf. p. 37, ἢ. 2 above.
THE PROBLEM 53
later Jewish times Ludwig Blau 1 has given abundant examples of interest showing that it was an everyday occurrence to use an ostracon as writing material, especially for legal documents.
The potsherd was also in use in the Hellenistic period. This is proved firstly by the evidence of various authors, and secondly by thousands of ostraca inscribed with Greek which have been preserved all through the centuries in the burning, rainless soil of Egypt. Like the papyri, which the same agency has preserved to us in such numbers, the ostraca are a mirror of the changes of nationality and civilisation that occurred in the Nile Valley. All sorts of alphabets are represented on the ostraca discovered in Egypt 2—the hieratic and demotic scripts of the old Egyptian, besides Greek, Latin, Aramaic, Coptic, and Arabic.
Of all the various kinds there can be little doubt that the Greek are at present the most numerous. They range from the time of the first Ptolemies down to the beginning of the Arab occupation, 1.6. over a period of roughly a thousand years. The texts with which they are inscribed are of the most miscellaneous kind—receipts, letters, con- tracts, bills, directions as to payments, decrees, and even extracts from classical authors. On the whole we may say that the texts met with on ostraca are similar in kind to those of the papyri—which we have already seen to be so astonishingly abundant—the only difference being that the ostraca on account of their size generally have shorter texts than the papyri. The great majority of the ostraca we possess are certainly tax-receipts.
In the second book of his Greek Ostraca Wilcken published 1,624 specimens of these modest records of the past. No
1 Papyri und Talmud, p. 13 f., and in the 35th Jahresbericht der Landes- Rabbinerschule in Budapest (1911-12), Budapest, 1912, p. 65 f.
2 It is not impossible for chance discoveries of ostraca to be made even in Northern Europe. In the Museum at Wiesbaden there is a fragment of a jar (No. 15,527), found in the ground belonging to No. 29, Langgasse, Wiesbaden, inscribed in ink with writing of the early Imperial period; it exhibits probably (unlike most ostraca) the remains of an inscription de- scribing the contents of the jar. It is remarkable that the writing has lasted almost two thousand years in a layer of peaty soil. Wilhelm Unverzagt refers me (2 May, 1922) to a publication by Ritterling, Annalen des Vereins fiir Nassauische Altertumskunde und_Geschichteforschung 29 (1898).
54 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
less than 1,355 of these had never been published before: they were hunted out with infinite pains by Wilcken in the museums of Berlin, London, Paris, Rome, Turin, Leyden, etc., and in private collections.1 The task of decipherment was one of extreme difficulty; the writing on the ostraca is cursive, often running into grotesque eccentricities, with a whole host of abbreviations and special signs. But the masterly skill which Wilcken had shown as one of the de- cipherers of the Berlin papyri was again most brilliantly displayed.2, The result is that these humble texts are now ready to the scholar’s hand, not indeed in a form that pre- sents no problems and enigmas, but at least so edited as to be studied without effort.
We are further indebted to Wilcken for a good deal of the historical discussion of all this new material. His Book I. constitutes a commentary on the grand scale, not in the sense that each single one of the ostraca receives separate interpretation. (brief notes are given to many of them in Book II.), but in the form of a systematised dis- cussion of the whole enormous miscellany. First comes a detailed introduction on the ostraca as writing material, including the provenance and various fortunes of the ostraca. The formulae employed in receipts are next examined, and the author then plunges into the minutiae of the Egyptian system of taxes and duties in the Ptolemaic and Roman periods. Next come economic observations, and researches on topo- graphy, metrology, chronology, and palaeography. Papyri, inscriptions, and ancient authors are constantly quoted in illustration and comparison. The book was dedicated
1 The number of ostraca in European museums and libraries has since increased by thousands—U. Wilcken, Archiv fir Papyrusforschung, 4, p. 146. Entirely new collections, such as the one at Heidelberg, have been formed. [The Strassburg collection is being edited by Paul Viereck and Wilhelm Spiegelberg, Griechische und griechisch-demotische Ostraka der Univer- sitats- und Landesbibliothek zu Strassburg im Elsass, Bd. I., Texte, Berlin, 1924. A second volunie, containing a commentary on the 812 ostraca here published, is in preparation. Tr.]
2 Among the happiest recollections of my life as a scholar is the time at Heidelberg when, having obtained a quantity of ostraca by the kind offices of a friend, I was so fortunate as to have Wilcken with me as ξένος in the house for a few days while I was unpacking the box from Egypt. Most of the specimens he was able to read, date, and classify straight away as they came out of the chaff, after a brief inspection.
THE PROBLEM 55
to Theodor Mommsen, and no offering more worthy of the great master’s acceptance could have been produced. It is in every respect a monument of learning.
To theologians the ostraca are of no small value. They add many new touches to our knowledge of the life of ancient times. They throw light on large tracts of the civilisation upon which the Greek Old Testament, many of the books of the Apocrypha, the works of Philo and of the Egyptian Christians were based. They show us the men of the age of fulfilment} in their workaday clothes, and they afford reliable evidence concerning the language spoken in the Hellenised Mediterranean world at the time when the apostolic mission became to ‘“‘ the Greeks”’ a Greek. In these facts lies the great indirect value of the ostraca (as of the non- .literary papyri) to the student of Greek Judaism and of the first centuries of Christianity. Detailed proof of this assertion will be offered in the following chapters.
Even more decidedly than the papyri, the ostraca are documents belonging to the lower orders of the people. The potsherd was in fact the cheapest writing material there was, obtainable by every one gratis from the nearest rubbish-heap. For this reason it was so admirably adapted for recording the vote of the Demos in cases of ostracism. The ostracon was beneath the dignity of the well-to-do. As a proof of the poverty of Cleanthes the Stoic it is related that he could not afford papyrus and therefore wrote on ostraca or on leather.2 In the same way we find the writers of Coptic potsherd letters even in Christian times apologising now and then to their correspondents for having made use of an ostracon in temporary lack of papyrus.? We, how- ever, have cause to rejoice at the breach of etiquette. The ostraca take us right to the heart of the class to which the primitive Christians were most nearly related, and in which the new faith struck root in the great world.
Direct information relating to the very oldest Christianity
1 [ When the fulness of the time was come,” Gal. iv. 4.. TR.]
2 Diog. Laert. vii. 173-4. <A similar story is told of Apollonius Dyscolus, Wilcken, I. p. 6. (Apollonius “the Peevish,” grammarian of Alexandria, 2. 140 A.D. TR.]
3. Cf. Crum, Coptic Ostraca, p. 49. For example No. 129, p. 55: ‘‘ Excuse me that I cannot find papyrus as J am in the country.”
56 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
has not yet been yielded to us by the ostraca. The Coptic potsherds, however, with their abundance of letters, frag- ments of letters, and similar texts, are of quite unique value for the light they throw on the religious and social history of Christian Egypt; and they have been reinforced by Greek ostraca of the Christian period.1 On the other hand, the space available for writing being usually so small, we can hardly expect to recover on ostraca any large remains of early Christian literary texts.
The ostraca will restore to us no lost fathers of the Church and no lost heretical writers. They have yielded hitherto - only short quotations from classical authors, and those probably schoolroom exercises. The writers of ostraca were as arule quite innocent of literary interests. After the scanty fragments discussed by Egger 3 there seemed but little hope of recovering even Biblical quotations,? until R. Reitzenstein published from a Strassburg ostracon of about the 6th century a hymn to the Virgin * which showed decided marks of the
1 Cf. Frankfurter Zeitung, 12 July, 1907, 2nd morning edition: ‘It is
reported from Alexandria that the excavations in the ancient Christian town that grew up round the tomb of St. Menas have brought to light amongst
other things a series of valuable ostraca. . . . Dr. H. I. Bell of the Manu- script Department of the British Museum examined with Dr. Kenyon a number of well-preserved specimens. ... Among these documents are
instructions for the payment of vine-dressers, wine-pressers (men who trod the grapes with their feet), laundrymen, and other workmen, for services rendered for the national sanctuary. Payment is made in money, in kind, or in foéd, and disabled workmen are also provided for. Comparisons with papyrus documents lead to the conclusion that the specimens hitherto de- ciphered belong to the 5th century. The same date is indicated by the . stratum in which they were found. More than 200 ostraca have been re- covered so far.” They were published by E. Drerup, Rémische Quartalschrift 22 (1908), p.. 240 ff. Crum, Egypt Exploration Fund’s Report 1908-9, p. 64, would assign them to the 7th, or at the earliest to the 6th century a.D.
2 Observations sur quelques fragments de poterie antique, Mémoires de l’Académie des Inscriptions, t. XXI. 1, Paris, 1857, p. 377 ff.
3 The ‘fragment of earthenware’’ from Megara with the text of the Lord’s Prayer, published by R. Knopf, Athenische Mitteilungen, 1900, p.'313 ff., and Zeitschrift fiir die neutest. Wissenschaft, 2 (1901), p. 228 ff., is not a fragment of a broken vessel, not a true ostracon, but a tablet no doubt made specially to receive the inscriptidn. The writing was scratched on the soft clay and then made permanent by burning. I inspected the tablet on 28 April, 1906, at Athens, and a plaster cast of it is in my possession.
* Zwei religionsgeschichtliche Fragen nach ungedvuckten griechischen Texten dey Strassburger Bibliothek, Strassburg, 1901. Cf. the remarks by Anrich in the Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 27 (1902), col. 304 f., and by U. Wilcken in the Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung, 2, p. 140,
THE PROBLEM 57
influence of Luke i. Since then Crum, in his Coptic Ostraca, has given us ostraca with Greek quotations from the Bible, while Pierre Jouguet and Gustave Lefebvre have published a late ostracon from Thebes with a rude drawing of “ Saint Peter the Evangelist ’’ and a few lines of Greek that have not yet been identified.1 Besides this Lefebvre has made known to us quite a series of gospel quotations in his Frag- ments Grecs des Evangiles sur Ostraka.* This publication alone enables us to fill an empty page in the history of the New Testament. It gives us the text of 20 Greek ostraca, large and small, inscribed with portions of our gospels. They were purchased many years ago in Upper Egypt by Bouriant, and are now a treasured possession of the French Institute of Oriental Archaeology. The exact place and circumstances of their discovery could not be ascertained, but their authenticity is beyond question. Their age can be conjectured from the style of the handwriting, and it appears that they were written probably in the 7th century, in the time of the Arab conquest.
They afford interesting materials for palaeography and the history of the text * of the gospels which it is to be hoped will not be neglected by scholars. They contain in the handwriting of three different persons the text of Matt. xxvii.
1 Bulletin de Correspondance Hellénique, 28 (1904), p. 205 f., 29 (1905), p. 104. In any case the “evangelist Peter”’ is remarkable—no doubt a reminiscence of the Gospel of Peter.
2 Bulletin de l’Institut francais d’archéologie orientale, t. IV., Le Caire, 1904; the separate reprint which lies before me consists of 15 pages quarto, with 3 plates of facsimiles. I here make use of an article on ‘‘ Evangelien- fragmente auf Agyptischen Tonscherben ” which I contributed to Die Christ- liche Welt, 20 (1906), col. 19 ff. Cf. further A. Bludau, Griechische Evange- lienfragmente auf Ostraka, Biblische Zeitschrift, 1906, p. 386 ff. Caspar René Gregory, Die griechischen Handschvriften des Neuen Testaments, p. 43, denotes these ostraca by the number 0153 in his list, and the above-mentioned Lord’s Prayer from Megara by the number o152 (p. 42 f.).
3 Every ancient Bible-fragment that was certainly written in Egypt helps us to answer the question, ‘‘ What text of the Bible was current in Egypt? ”’ Lefebvre examined the character of the text provisionally, and Bludau has added further details. The chief result is to establish the relationship of this text with the BNL etc. group, 7.e. with the group of authorities claimed by W. Bousset for the text of Hesychius. This is a new proof of the correctness of Bousset’s hypothesis, on which cf. my Verdffentlichungen aus der Heidelberger Papyrus-Sammlung I. p. 84, and Bousset’s report on H. von Soden’s recon- struction of the text of Hesychius, Theol. Lit.-Ztg. (1907) col. 71 ff. It would be a valuable piece of research to examine all the N.T. fragments found in Egypt with respect to this question, The material is not scanty.
58 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
31-32; Mark v. 40-41, ix. 17, 18, 22, xv. 21; Luke xii. 13- 15,1 15-16, xxii. 40-45, 45-49, 49-53, 53-54, 55-59, 59-60, 61, 61-64, 65-69, 70-71; Johni. 1-9, 14-17, xviii. 19-25, xix. 15-17.
Thanks to the editor’s kindness I am able to give here a (reduced) facsimile of ostracon no. 16, containing Luke xxii. 70-71 (Figure 6).
The text runs thus :—
ειἰπαν δὲ παντες And they all said, Art Thou
συ ovy εἰοὺς Tov θυ then the Son of God? And o δε pos avrous
ey ὑμεις 5 λεγετέ
ὅ ore eyw εἰμι οι δε I am. And they said, What εἰπαν τι eTt χρειαν
το ἐχομεν μαρτυριαν ᾿
~ avrot yap ἤκουσαμε 3 (sic)? for we ourselves have
He said unto them, Ye say that
further need have we witness
απο Tov στοματος heard from . . . mouth.
Of the two characters running upwards in the left-hand margin (read so by Lefebvre) the « is certainly a numeral (= 10) denoting that this ostracon is the tenth in a con- secutive series. The preceding ostraca with Luke xxii. 40- 69 do in fact bear the numbers 1-9. The ὃ however, which occurs with different pointing on most of the older members of this group, has not yet been explained. I used to think it was the number of ἃ chapter according to an old ecclesiastical division. In the copy of the gospel from which the ostraca were made Luke xxii. 40 ff. would then belong to the 7oth chapter of Luke, whereas in the usual | ancient division into chapters 4 it belongs to chapter 78.
‘It will be seen at once that among the 20 specimens the
1 On the back of this ostracon (no. 5) there is the name Luke and two lines which the editor could not account for. I print them in minuscules :—
στιλβοντί ol. . Ἰναφεῖ
This is certainly a fragment of Mark ix. 3 :—
στιλβοντία λευκα Acar] ofa γ]ναφεῖυς εἴς. 2 [The dots above v and ἡ (line 8) are characteristic of the writing of the time. TR.] 3 (= ηκουσαμεν. TR.] 4 Hermann Freiherr von Soden, Die Schriften des Neuen Testaments in ihrer altesten erveichbaven Textgestalt I., Berlin, 1902, p. 411.
Fic. 6.—Ostracon from Upper Egypt, inscribed with Luke xxii, 70 f., 7th cent. a.p. Now in the Institut francais d’Archéologie orientale, Cairo. By permission of M. Gustave Lefebvre.
THE PROBLEM 59
gospel of St. Luke is the most amply represented. Two ostraca contain the consecutive text of Luke xii. 13-16, and ten ostraca actually contain the complete text of Luke xxii. 40-71, 7.6. a large portion of the account of the Passion. The fact that these ten ostraca belong together is marked externally by the numerals 1-10 which, as mentioned above, the writer affixed to them. The fragments from St. John probably also belong to one and the same series. This observation is important in two ways. On the one hand it points to the fact that probably all these gospel ostraca represent a single find. This is confirmed by the occurrence of Mark ix. 3 on the back of one of the fragments of St. Luke, as already pointed out. That passage occurs in the account of the Transfiguration, which immediately precedes the section from which ostracon no. 3 (Mark ix. 17, 18, 22) is taken. On the other hand we now have an indication of the nature of the whole collection, for light is thrown on the question, “‘ For what purpose were they inscribed with texts from the gospels? ”’
If the ostracon inscribed with Mark ix. 17 ff. were the only one that had come down to us it would be easy to suppose that the text was to be used as a curative amulet, in this case as an amulet against demoniacal possession. The Heidelberg University Library, for instance, possesses several Biblical amulets of this kind on parchment and papyrus. The editor of the ostraca tells us in fact that Perdrizet sug- gested the amulet hypothesis! to him. But the series of ten consecutive ostraca and the other series of which we may conjecture demand another explanation than this. It is inconceivable that anybody should have carried ten ostraca about with him as an amulet, for the simple reason that they would have been far too heavy. I have myself tried the experiment, though with no thought of amulets in my mind, for I have often carried ten or a dozen ostraca
1 There is an article on gospel amulets by E. Nestle in the Zeitschr. fir die neutest. Wissenschaft, 6 (1906) p. 96. Cf. further Gerhard Kropatscheck, De amuletorum apud antiquos usu, Diss. Gryphiae, 1907, p. 28 ff., and the list in S. Eitrem and A. Fridrichsen, Ein christliches Amulett auf Papyrus, Kristiania, 1921, p. 16. [In Hastings and Selbie’s Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics III. 392-472 (1911) the subject of “‘ Charms and Amulets ’’ is discussed by various writers under headings which include Christian, Egyptian, Hebrew, etc. TR.]
60 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
from my collection in my pockets to show to the audience at a lecture. It was in many respects a pleasing burden, but not in the least comfortable.
Lefebvre’s own theory was that the ostraca were written to form a cheap gospel lectionary, a book (if we may use the expression) for private or public reading consisting of extracts (Pericopae) from the gospels or perhaps even a continuous text. This theory we must accept unless, as now seems to me more probable, the ostraca were copied out by poor candidates for deacon’s orders at the command of their bishop.1_ Whoever has realised the character of ostraca in general will not be slow to perceive the real import of this new find. Ostraca were as a rule the writing material used by the poor 2; a potsherd was to be had for nothing, even in the most straitened household, when some person or persons unknown had been unkind enough to break the oil- cruse or the kneading-pan. The person who wrote gospel texts on ostraca was a poor person: a would-be deacon, or perhaps a monk, a schoolboy, or a simple woman—some soul forgotten among the myriads that perish.
So we might add this superscription to Lefebvre’s fascinat- ing work: “ The gospels in the hands of the common people, the gospel among the poor of Egypt at the time when the deluge of Islam was approaching.’’ In the very selfsame division of society which made them what they are, the most democratic texts of all antiquity, we encounter once again the gospels. Six centuries have passed, during which they have been copied on papyrus, on parchment, yea even on purple vellum with letters of gold, and thinkers and potentates, rich men and renowned have read them. After their long journeying through the world the gospels are at home once more: on worthless castaway potsherds a poor man writes the imperishable words that are the heritage of the poor.
Our brief general description of the newly discovered texts is ended. New Testament in hand, let us now betake our- selves to the sites of excavations in the South and East
' Cf. the notes to the letter (No. 25) of the three candidates in Chapter III. below (p. 222 f.). : 2. Cf. the references at p. 55 above.
Fic. 7.—Site of
the Excavations in Delos. From a photograph by Miss M. C. de Graffenried.
THE PROBLEM 61
and endeavour to decipher the stone inscriptions from the period which witnessed the great religious change. Or if we must remain at home, let us at least open the Sacred Book and compare it with the folio volumes of inscriptions, papyri, and ostraca. The New Testament is an exile here in the West, and we do well to restore it to its home in Anatolia. It is right to set it once more in the company of the un- learned, after it has made so long a stay amid the surround- ings of modern culture. We have had hundreds of University chairs for the exact, scientific interpretation of the little Book—let us now listen while the homeland of the New Testament yields up its own authentic witness to the inquiring scholar.
1 An illustration offered itself unsought in a pretty little snapshot taken by Miss M. C. de Graffenried, of Washington (Fig. 7). M. Holleaux, the director of the French excavations, is seen explaining to us one of the two Heliodorus inscriptions at Delos, 19 May, 1906. [Μ. Holleaux is pointing with his stick. The stooping figure to his right is Professor Deissmann. The tall figure seen against the fluted column is Professor von Duhn, of Heidel- berg. The other two are F. Pfister (next to Professor Deissmann) and R. Pagenstecher. See their names in Index V. TR.] This is the Heliodorus
of the Second Book of Maccabees and Raphael’s Stanza d’Eliodoro (cf. Bibel- studien, p. 171 ff.; Bible Studies, p. 303).
CHAPTER II
THE LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT ILLUS- TRATED FROM THE NEW TEXTS
1, AS we study the New Testament on the lines indicated | at the close of the preceding chapter, the first great impres- sion we receive is that the language to which we are accus- tomed in the New Testament is on the whole just the kind of Greek that simple, unlearned folk of the Roman Imperial period were in the habit of using. The non-literary written memorials of that age at length have opened our eyes to the true linguistic position of the New Testament. That is the first and most easily demonstrated of the services rendered us by the new texts.3
A generation ago, when it began to be asserted with some confidence that the isolation of ‘‘ New Testament " Greek as a separate entity was impossible from the scientific point of view, since it was practically identical with the popular international Greek of the period, theologians? and philo- logists received the statement with more or less active dissent. One eminent Greek scholar? of the philological school said it was the language of a naturalist rather than a
1 Earlier works of mine dealing with the subject of the following pages are: Bibelstudien; Neue Bibelstudien; an address on ‘‘ Die sprachliche Erforschung der griechischen Bibel,’’ Giessen, 1898; the article on ‘‘ Hellenis- tisches Griechisch ’ in Herzog and Hauck, Realencylopddie,? VII. 627 ff.; four reviews of literature in the Theologische Rundschau, 1 (1897-98) p. 463 ff., 5 (1902) p. 58 ff., 9 (1906) p. 210 ff., 15 (1912) p. 339 ff.; and my Cambridge lectures on ‘‘ The Philology of the Greek Bible,” published in The Expositor October 1907 to January 1908, and afterwards in book form, London, 1908. I endeavoured to sketch the historical results in a lecture delivered at Graz and published under the title, Die Urgeschichte des Christentums im Lichte der Sprachforschung, Tiibingen, 1910.
2 The question was gone into most in detail by Julius Boehmer, Das biblische ‘Im Namen,” Giessen, 1898, and Zwei wichtige Kapitel aus der biblischen Hermeneutik, Beitrage zur Férderung christlicher Theologie, 5 (1901), Heft 6, Giitersloh, 1902, p. 50 ff.; and cf. his remarks in Die Studierstube, 1 (1903) Ῥ. 340 ff., 2 (1904) p. 324 ff., 6 (1908) Ὁ. 587 f.
"5 ΤΕ, Blass, reviewing Deissmann’s Bibelstudien in the Theologische Litera- turzeitung, 20 (1895) col. 487. TR.] ; 62
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 63
theologian, and those familiar with the polemical literature of that date will know what the reproach of naturalism then meant in Germany.! Since then, however, the specialists have changed their minds on this not unimportant point. _New Testament philology has been revolutionised; and pro- bably all the workers concerned in it both on the Continent and in English-speaking countries are by this time agreed that the starting-point for the philological investigation of the New Testament must be the language of the non-literary papyri, ostraca, and inscriptions. The theory scored a complete victory in Albert Thumb’s valuable book on the Greek Language in the Hellenistic age?; Stanislaus Wit- kowski acknowledged his adherence in the critical reviews which he gave (1904 ἀπά 1912) of recent literature dealing with the Κοινή3 In a number of different articles,4 but more especially in his recent Grammar of the New Testa- ment, James Hope Moulton worked out the most important of the details that result from the application of the theory; while Theodor Nageli,® working by the same method, exhibited very effectively the vocabulary of St. Paul. Rudolf Knopf*® has more than once taken up the same position. Not to mention others, the following philologists of repute have signified their acceptance of the theory and its results: firstly Jakob Wackernagel, in his article on the Greek language contributed to Die Kultur der Gegenwart’;
1 [Conservative theologians accused their liberal colleagues of proceeding on “ naturalistic ” lines in disregard or in defiance of Divine Revelation. TR.]
? Cf. p. 22 above; also the Theol. Rundschau, 5 (1902) p. 85 ff., and Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung, 2, pp. 410 ff., 455 ff.
3 Bericht iiber die Literatur zur Koine aus den Jahren 1898-1902 (Jahres- bericht iiber die Fortschritte der classischen Altertumswissenschaft, Vol. 120 (1904 I.) pp. 153-256, especially p. 200 ff. The same 1903-1906, 7bid., Vol. 159 (1912 III.) pp. 1-279. The two reports are a veritable storehouse of modern research on the Kou.
Cf. pp. 20f., 48 f. above, and Moulton’s ‘‘ New Testament Greek in the Light of Modern Discovery ” in Essays on Some Biblical Questions of the Day, edited by H. B. Swete, London, 1909, pp: 461-505. Of the many other works in English I will only mention those of S. Angus, Harvard Theological Review, 2 (Oct. 1909) pp. 446-464, and Princeton Theological Review, 8 (1910) pp. 44- 92.
5 Cf. p. 20, n. 6 above. :
6 Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart I. col. 1128-1131, and Einfuhrung in das N.T., Giessen, 1919, pp. I-19.
7 Die Kultur dey Gegenwart (edited by Paul Hinneberg), Part I. section viii., Berlin and Leipzig, 1905, p. 303 f.; #1907, p. 308 f.; *r912, p. 388 f.
64 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
secondly, Ludwig Radermacher,! in his New Testament Grammar; thirdly Ὁ. C. Hesseling,? who at the same time gave us the comforting assurance that no dogma of the Church is threatened by the new method. There are also instances of Catholic theologians both of the Western® and of the Eastern * Church who have signified their approval.
What are the points concerned in judging of the language of the New Testament ?
We may start from what is probably the average educated person’s knowledge of the subject. He would say that “the original language ”’ of the New Testament was Greek. This statement, however, is really very vague.
It is true, certainly, that it is a Greek New Testament which presents itself to the scholar for study, but within the New Testament there are portions of which “ the original language ’’ was not Greek, but Semitic. Jesus of Nazareth, the Man whose personality was the decisive impulse, did not speak Greek when He went about His public work. He spoke the local idiom of His native Galilee, the language which, in the night of betrayal, betrayed His disciple Peter to be a Galilean. This language was Aramaic, a dialect akin to Hebrew but not identical with it; and, to be quite exact, it was Galilean Aramaic that our Lord spoke. In that dialect the gospel was first preached. The ordinary reader of the Bible even now hears the last echo of the original when he comes upon such words as mammon, talitha cumi, abba, or such names as Barabbas, Martha, etc., which are all of them Aramaic, Moreover, the oldest record of the words that Jesus spake, the record of His apostle Matthew, was no doubt written in Aramaic for the Palestinian Christ- ians who spoke that language. That most primitive version of our Lord’s words has perished, unfortunately, so far as the
1 Cf. p. 20, n. 9 above.
2 De betekenis van het Nieuwgrieks voor de geschiedenis der Griekse taal en. der Griekse letterkunde, Leiden, 1907, p. 17. ᾿
3 E.g. Josef Sickenberger, Zum ραροηνᾶτγι ρθη Stand der Erforschung des Neuen Testamentes, in the Literary Supplement to the Kélnische Volkszeitung, 29 Nov. 1906, p. 379.
4 Cf. 5. J. Sobolewsky, Orthodoxe Theologische Encyklopddie herausg. von N. N. Glubokowsky, Vol. 9, St. Petersburg, 1908, col. 603-754, a summary especially valuable for its references to the literature of the subject. It has
been translated into Modern Greek by G. Papamichael, H Kown Ἑλληνικὴ Γλωσσα, Alexandria, 1909.
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 65
Aramaic original is concerned. What would we give if we ‘could recover but one papyrus book with a few leaves con- taining genuine Aramaic sayings of Jesus! For those few leaves we would, I think, part smilingly with the theological output of a whole century.
But it is of little use to speak further of this “1. It is more sensible to inquire why the words of Jesus are no longer extant in their original Aramaic. The answer is that Christianity, in becoming a world religion, gradually forgot its oldest records—records that had originated far away from the world and were unintelligible to the world—and so they were lost. The Christian missionaries with an Aramaic book of gospels in their hands would have been powerless to make propaganda in what was in fact a Greek or rather Hellenised world. An Aramaic gospel-book would have condemned Christianity to remain a Palestinian sect. Ere it could become a world religion it had to learn the language of the world, and that is why the gospels put on the habit of the world; for that reason St. Paul and others spoke and wrote the international language, and the New Testa- ment took final form as a Greek book. The handful of earlier Aramaic copies vanished before the multitude of Greek manuscripts of the gospels, which from the second century onwards became more and more widely diffused. Their fate was the same as that of our spelling-books and copy-books. How many of the men who go down from the university with boxes full of Latin and Greek books and lecture notes will find still in existence at home the thumbed and ragged pages from which they first learnt the A BC?
In the Roman Imperial period the language of the great world was Greek, which numbered more speakers.then than the Latin with its millions. The great military expeditions of Alexander the Great had combined with the more peaceful victories of commerce, art, literature, and science to produce, just at the great turning-point in religious history, a more or less complete Hellenisation of those portions of the Mediterranean area which had been from time immemorial the home of civilisation. In the south of Europe, in Asia Minor,?
1 Karl Holl, Das Fortleben der Volkssprachen in nachchristlicher Zeit, Hermes, 43 (1908) p. 240, must however not be forgotten for its important evidence as to Asia Minor.
66 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Egypt, and other parts of northern Africa, the culture and even the language was Greek, right down to the lower orders, of urban society especially. Even among the residents of Rome there were plenty who spoke Greek. We know, for instance, that the Roman Jews of the period, a numerous body, spoke Greek almost exclusively.
In this Hellenised world, however, men no longer spoke local dialects of Greek. The world had become unified, and men spoke no more the ancient Doric, or Holic, Ionic, or Attic, but a single Greek international language, one common tongue. The- precise origin of this international Greek, which it is usual to refer to as the Κοινή (“ common” language), has not been made out,! nor need it detain us here. The fact remains that in the period which gave birth to Christianity there was an international Greek language.
It was not indeed a uniform entity. Two main divisions are recognisable, though the: boundary between them is anything but fixed. Like every living language this inter- national Greek possessed one form marked by greater free- dom, and another marked by greater restraint. The one we call colloquial, the other literary.
The colloquial language in its turn went off into various shades of distinction, according to the refinement of the speaker. It was natural, moreover, for the literary language to display varieties of coloration. One influence was at that time powerfully affecting it, namely, a romantic enthusiasm for the great classics of the former age in Attic Greek. People imitated their manner of writing in the conviction that here once for all the standard of good Greek had been set. The followers of this romantic movement are called “ Atticists ᾿᾿ after the model they chose for imitation. Their convention was all but binding on the cultured and literary of that epoch, and has always remained one of the great powers in the intellectual world, influencing our humanistic studies even at the present day.2 We still
1 Good statements of the questions at present in dispute are given by D. C. Hesseling, De Koine en de oude dialekten van Griekenland, Amsterdam, 1906; Mayser, Grammatik dey griech. Papyri aus dey Ptolemderzeit, p. 1 ff.; aud Karl Krumbacher, Byzantinische Zeitschrift, 17 (1908) p. 577 ff.
? Not always for the good : it is partly responsible for the widespread lack of appreciation among our scholarly classes of things pertaining to the common
people.
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 67
possess works in plenty that were written by the ancient Atticists, and we are well informed as to their theories.1 We do, moreover, possess memorials of the colloquial language of culture in that period, since there were several authors who paid little or no attention to the rules of the Atticists.
Memorials of the popular colloquial language, on the other hand, memorials of the spoken Greek of the people, were scarcely known to the general run of scholars at a period distant only some score or so of years from the present day. The lower orders, in all their wide extent, who in the time of the Roman Empire made up the bulk of the popula- tion in the great cities of the Mediterranean coast and the interior,—the non-literary people, whose vulgarisms and expressive terms were scorned and tabooed by the Atticists as weeds in the garden of language,—the classes of people whom St. Paul at the end of 1 Cor. i. describes with all the warmth of a blood relation—seemed, with their language, to be buried for ever in oblivion.
And what judgment was usually formed of the language of the New Testament, under these circumstances ?
We may state the case thus: In many details due emphasis was given to its relation with the contemporary international Greek, but on the whole it was isolated by the science of language, and raised to the rank of a separate linguistic entity under the title of “‘ New Testament ” Greek.
Two circumstances more particularly helped to make this isolative, dogmatic method prevail. From the point of view of religion and theology the isolation of the New Testa- ment was encouraged by the doctrine of mechanical in- spiration, combining with a very lively conception of the canon of the New Testament as a hard-and-fast boundary. From the point of view of language and philology every one with a classical training felt the strong contrast between the language of Scripture and the Attic Greek he had learnt at school. Enslaved by the immemorial prejudice of the Atticists, that the Greek world ended with Alexander the
1 Of fundamental importance is the excellent work of Wilhelm Schmid (of Tiibingen), Der Atticismus in seinen Hauptvertretern von Dionysius von Hali- karnass bis auf den zweiten Philostratus, 4 vols. and index-vol., Stuttgart, 1887-1897. <
68 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Great (whereas it really began with him), many who read the Greek New Testament never dreamt of taking up other Greek texts of the Imperial (and post-Alexandrian) period. The result was that for such readers there was a great gap between their New Testament and the earlier stage of Greek with which they were familiar, viz. the classical Attic of the 5th and 4th centuries B.c.1_ Not only the theologians were at fault: philologists were in the same condemnation. So recently as 1894 the great Greek scholar Friedrich Blass,? of Halle, despite his marvellous knowledge of the whole range of Greek literature, asserted that’ New Testament Greek must be recognised “‘ as something peculiar, obeying its own laws.”
We owe it to the newly discovered or at least newly appreciated records that this isolative method of treatment has been given up. Of the literary language, conventionalised according to artificial rules, there were productions enough extant already. Then came the inscribed stones, papyri, and potsherds—themselves not absolutely free from the tyranny of school and office usage #—and gave us a wealth of documents representative of the colloquial language, especially in its popular form, just as it had grown and was still growing and running riot in a state of nature.> The papyri and ostraca particularly furnished ample material
1 Much in the same way as people used to be fond of ignoring the period between the coriclusion of the Hebrew Old Testament and the rise of Christi- anity with reference to the history of religion.
* Theologische Literaturzeitung, 19 (1894) col. 338. Blass afterwards changed his opinion on the subject. :
8 W. L. Lorimer, “‘ Deissmannism before Deissmann,” The Expository Times, Vol. 32, No. 7, April 1921, p. 330, deserves thanks for pointing out that the right view had occasionally been upheld at an earlier date. He refers to Sir James Donaldson (1831-1915) and cites his article “ Greek Language (Biblical) ” in the third edition of Kitto’s Cyclopaedia of Biblical Literature (ed. W. L, Alexander, 1862-66) Vol. II. (1864), pp. 169°-172%. It should not be forgotten, however, that until the papyri etc. were systematically turned to account, the wrong view was generally prevalent in Germany, even among classical scholars. I have myself long ago called attention to certain correct expressions of opinion in the earlier period (cf. p. 71 below).
ὁ On this point cf. especially Edwin Mayser, Grammatik der griechischen Papyri aus der Ptolemderzeit, Ὁ. 3 f.
5 It was long since noticed that the Mishna and other old Jewish texts contain considerable traces of popular Greek, but the subject does not come
within the scope of this book. Cf. Paul Fiebig, Das Griechisch der Mischna, Zeitschrift fir die Neutestamentliche Wissenschaft, 9 (1908), pp. 297-314.
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 69
for comparative purposes, first as regards phonology and accidence, and then as regards the meanings conveyed by words. The inscriptions, however, also produced a sur- prising harvest, principally of the lexical variety.
2. The work to be accomplished by the linguistic his- torian on the New Testament includes great problems yet unsolved, but one thing is clear already. The New Testa- ment has been proved to be, as a whole, a monument of late colloquial Greek, and in the great majority of its component parts the monument of a more or less popular colloquial language.
The most popular in tone are the synoptic gospels,1 especially when they are reporting the sayings of Jesus. Even St. Luke, with his occasional striving after greater correctness of expression, has not deprived them of their simple beauty. The Epistle of St. James again ae re-echoes the popular language of the gospels.
The Johannine writings, including the Revelation, are also linguistically deep-rooted in the most popular colloquial language.2- The Logos, occurring in the very first line of
1 It is admirably remarked by J. Wellhausen, Exnleitung in die dvet ersten Evangelien, Berlin, 1905, p.9: ‘‘ In the gospels spoken Greek, and such Greek as was spoken by the people, makes its entry into literature. Some theologians have made vain endeavours to reduce it to the rules of the school grammar, Professed Greek scholars have in the past generally looked upon it from a narrow point of view only to despise it, but have lately,under the influence of comparative and historical philology, begun to criticise it with an open mind.”’ In his own linguistic comments on the gospels, where it becomes necessary to decide which phenomena are non-Greek, Wellhausen has, however, relied far too much on the Attic standard of Greek. In many passages his book is a testimony to the enormous influence which the orthodox doctrine of the Atticists was still able to exert on an enlightened mind. Wellhausen says him- self (p. 35), “‘ Greek being such an elastic and many-sided language, it may well be that here and there a Semiticism may also prove to be a Greek vul- garism ’’—and his words certainly apply in the great majority of the cases he has put down as Semitic. ‘‘ There is not the slightest use,’’ he says im- mediately afterwards, ‘‘in thrusting one’s head into the Greek thicket "᾿-- but are we on that account to bury our heads in the sands of Semiticisms ἢ The question is, What was customary within the sphere of the living Greek language of the people in the Imperial period? And if I am to answer this question I must purge myself of the leaven of the Atticists and study that living language. That Aramaisms exist, I have never denied; only as to the number of the ‘“‘ non-Greek’’ phenomena in the gospels I am of another opinion than Wellhausen, because to me ‘‘non-Greek’”’ is not identical with ‘‘ non-Attic.”
3. Cf, the remarks on the Johannine style below, p. 131 ff.
70 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
the gospel, has blinded most critics to the essential character of a book which, for all its share in the world’s history, is a book of the people. ἱ
St. Paul too can command the terse pithiness of the homely gospel speech, especially in his ethical exhortations as pastor. These take shape naturally in clear-cut maxims such as the people themselves use and treasure up. But even where St. Paul is arguing to himself and thinking deeply, so that he has recourse more to the language of contemplation and speculation, even where he borrows wings of the priestly fervour of the liturgist and the enthusiasm of the Psalmist, his Greek never becomes literary. It is never disciplined, say, by the canon of the Atticists, never tuned to the Asian rhythm?!: it remains non-literary.2. Thickly studded with rugged, forceful words taken from the popular idiom, it is perhaps the most brilliant example of the artless though not inartistic colloquial prose of a travelled city-resident of the Roman Empire, its. wonderful flexibility making it just the very Greek for use in a mission to all the world.
We are thus left with the total impression that the great mass of the texts which make up the New Testament, form- ing at the same time the most important part of the sacred volume in point of contents, are popular in character. The traces of literary language found in some few of the other texts cannot do away with this impression. On the con- trary, the contrast in which the Epistle to the Hebrews, for instance, stands linguistically to the earlier texts of Primitive Christianity, is peculiarly instructive to us. It points to the fact that the Epistle to the Hebrews, with its more definitely artistic, more literary language 3 (corresponding to
1 Friedrich Blass, Die Rhythmen der asianischen und vomischen Kunstprosa, Leipzig, 1905, regards the Epistles of St. Paul as largely consisting of rhythmi- cally elaborated artistic prose—a singular instance of the great scholar having gone astray; cf. Theol. Lit.-Ztg., 31 (1906) col. 231 ff.
2 Tentirely agree with Nageli (cf. especially p. 13 of his work) in his opinion of the apostle’s language.
% Nobody could appreciate this contrast more correctly or express it more happily than Origen (quoted in Eusebius, Eccl. Hist. VI. xxv. 11) has done: ὅτι ὁ χαρακτὴρ τῆς λέξεως τῆς πρὸς ‘EBpaious ἐπιγεγραμμένης ἐπιστολῆς οὐκ ἔχει τὸ ἐν λόγῳ ἰδιωτικὸν τοῦ ἀποστόλου ὁμολογήσαντος ἑαυτὸν ἰδιώτην εἶναι τῷ λόγῳ τουτέστι τῇ φράσει, ἀλλά ἐστιν ἡ ἐπιστολὴ συνθέσει τῆς λέξεως ᾿Ἑλληνικωτέρα, πᾶς ὃ ἐπιστά- μενος κρίνειν φράσεων διαφορὰς ὁμολογήσαι dv-—' that the linguistic character of the epistle entitled ‘ to the Hebrews ’ has none of that rudeness of speech which
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 71
its more theological subject-matter), constituted an epoch in the history of the new religion. Christianity is beginning to lay hands on the instruments of culture; the literary and theological period has begun. There will be more to say on this head in the next chapter.
The modern conception of New Testament Greek i® not altogether a new thing: our advances in knowledge rarely are. Under the late Roman Empire, when the old learning and culture came into hostile collision with Christianity, pagan controversialists spoke mockingly of the language of the New Testament as a boatman’s idiom. The Christian apologists accepted the taunt and made the despised simplicity of that language their well-warranted boast.1_ The hopeless attempt to prove the Bible as a whole and the New Testa- ment in particular to be artistically perfect in its external form was first made by Latin apologists.2 The same theory reappeared many centuries later in the conflict between the so-called Purists and Hebraists,? and was passionately maintained and disputed by these two rival schools of Biblical interpretation. To many it appeared as something perfectly obvious that Holy Scripture must be clothed in language at least as classical as that of Demosthenes or Plato, and the apostle himself confessed when he said [2 Cor. xi. 6] he was rude of speech, t.e.in expression, that on the contrary the epistle is more Greek in its stylistic
structure, will be admitted by everyone who is able to judge of differences of style.” ᾿
1 For details see Eduard Norden, Die antike Kunstprosa, II. p. 512 ff.
3 Eduard Norden, II. p. 526 ff.
3 See especially the account in Winer and Schmiedel, ὃ 2, p. 4 ff.—The latest phase of New Testament philology has sometimes been described as a revival of the strife between the Hebraists and the Purists. That is, however, not quite accurate. The primary dispute no longer concerns the fact of Hebrew (or rather, Semitic) intrusions in the Greek of the New Testament: no one denies the existence of Semiticisms; opinions are only divided with reference ‘to the relative proportion of these Semiticisms. On the other hand, there is. now no assertion of the ‘‘ purity " of New Testament Greek in the sense of the old disputants. The new tendency in the work now being done is to emphasise the popular and non-literary element in the language of the apostles and to protest against the dogmatic isolation of New Testament philology.—As early as 1863 we find Bishop Lightfoot remarking with the keen vision of a seer in one of his lectures: ‘‘. . . if we could only recover letters that ordinary people wrote to each other without any thought of being literary, we should have the greatest possible help for the understanding of the language of the ΝΥ. generally.” (Note by the Rev. J. Pulliblank in J. H. Moulton’s Grammar,? Ρ. 242.) Such letters (and other texts) have since then been made accessible jn great abundance by the papyri and ostraca,
72 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
assertions to the contrary were felt to be an outrage upon the. Holy Ghost. We for our part are on the side of those who see beauty in the wild rose-bush as well as in a Gloire de Dijon. What is natural is also beautiful, and does not cease to be beautiful until artificiality and pretence step in.! Thus in our opinion the new method of philological treatment brings out the peculiar beauty of the New Testament, by establishing the popular simplicity of the language in which it is written. The relation in which the language of the people stands to the artificial language of literature reminds us of the Master’s own words, when He said, ‘‘ Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do ' they spin: and yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.”’
3. How truly valuable the newly. recorded documents are in the study of the language of the New Testament can only be realised by examples. In the following pages, therefore, some characteristic examples have been selected from the vast mass of available material. With regard, however, to the first point to be illustrated; viz. the phonology and acci- dence, there is no need to go into details here; a few remarks of a general nature will suffice.?
A. The characteristic features of the living Greek language that was in international use are most clearly seen in the phonology and accidence. The assumption of a special New Testament or Biblical Greek is hopelessly refuted by the observations made in this field. All the hundreds of morpho- logical details in the Biblical texts which strike a reader accustomed to Plato and Xenophon will be found also in the contemporary ‘‘ profane” records of international Greek, especially in those texts which have come down to us in their
1 Analogies from other civilisations offer themselves in abundance. Tolstoy used to read his stories before publication to his peasants and then get them to re-tell the stories, so that he might avail himself of their alterations. ‘‘ What a mighty flood of fresh images, thoughts, and words would find its way into our petty, dried up, jargonised literature, ‘ cultivated ’ as it is to the degree of impossibility, if other writers would do the same and would love and respect the common people as Tolstoy does ” (Conversations with Tolstoy, Gesprache mit Tolstoj, published by J. Teneromo, Berlin, 1911, p. 78).
2 In what follows I have made occasional use of my article on ‘’ Hellenis- tisches Griechisch " in Herzog and Hauck, Realencyclopddie,® VII. p. 627 ff.
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 73
original form without passing through the refining fires of an Atticist purgatory. They occur in the inscriptions, but most of all in the ostraca and papyri. P. W. Schmiedel’s new edition of the Accidence of Winer’s Grammar of the New Testament Idiom appeared before the most important of the recently discovered paypri had been published, so that no use could be made of this most instructive material, and yet that book contains so many trustworthy observations as to make it impossible any longer to ignore the morphological identity of the supposed ‘‘ New Testament Idiom ”’ with the Hellenistic colloquial language. The other recent New Testament Grammars emphasised the fact still more, and, from another point of view, so did Karl Dieterich’s Researches on the History of the Greek Language from the Hellenistic Period to the roth Cent. A.D.1 Here we see the value.of things that are often loftily despised as philological trifles: the overwhelming amount of small facts ascertained with absolute certainty has brought New Testament philology into such close connexion with the general study of late Greek as will never again be broken. The Septuagint Grammars of Helbing and Thackeray, and the works of Psichari and R. Meister,? have established the same organic connexion between Septua- gint philology and the wider subject.
B. We quote one example from the special department of word-formation which may be called onomatology. The word Panthera, used as a man’s name, is of great interest to New Testament scholars, though it is not found in the Bible. It appears in late traditions concerning the family of Jesus of Nazareth, and plays a great part particularly in the Jewish legends of the birth of Christ. A good many years ago Hackel’s unsuccessful foray in the domain of New Testament research ὃ made the name familiar to a large public. Many scholars have bestowed their attention to it, and in almost every case they have concluded it to be a nickname specially invented for the purposes of Jewish polemics.4 The problem as to the origin of this name can now be solved with certainty, thanks particularly to Latin inscriptions. The name Panthera is
1 Cf. also Neue Bibelstudien, pp. 9-21; Bible Studies, pp. 181-193. 2 Cf. p. 19 above.
3 In The Riddle of the Universe (1899). 4 And derived either from πόρνος (fornicator) or παρθένος (virgin).
74 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
known in Attic inscriptions, but it occurs frequently in funeral and other inscriptions of the Imperial period as a cognomen of both men and women.!_ Most interesting of all, perhaps, is the tombstone of Tiberius Julius Abdes® Pantera, of Sidon in Phoenicia, a Roman archer at the very beginning of the Imperial Period. It was found near Bingerbriick, and is now in the museum at Kreuznach (Fig. 8). Taken in con- junction with the other inscriptions, this epitaph * from the German frontier of the Roman Empire * shows with absolute certainty that Panthera was not an invention. of Jewish scoffers, but a widespread name among the ancients.
C. Viewed in the light of the new documents the vocabulary of the New Testament also displays features characteristic of the Hellenistic colloquial language.
(a) With regard to the words themselves the proof of our thesis cannot in all cases be made out with the same com- pleteness as in the phonology and accidence; but there is no need for absolute completeness here. It is obvious that the vocabulary of the international language, recruited from all the countries that had acknowledged the supremacy of Greek, can never be completely known to us in all its fulness. As a matter of fact words are constantly turning up in the
1 Detailed proofs will be found in my article ‘‘ Der Name Panthera’”’ in Orientalische Studien (presentation volume to Theodor Néldeke), Gieszen, 1906, p. 871 ff. Cf. also the name Πάνθηρ Panther in a Fayim papyrus, 1o1— 102 A.D., which contains a number of Jewish names (Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 715, 14). ᾿
2 Count Wolf Baudissin explained this Ebed name to me (by postcard, dated Berlin, 29 January, 1907) as DN “Ia servant of Ists. This is not the only example of Isis occurring among the Phoenicians, My attention was called by the same authority to the soldier’s inscription at Ashmunén (Lidz- barski, Ephemeris ἐὰν semitische Epigvaphik 2. p. 338), Κοττίων ᾿Αβδέους, ‘‘Cottio the son of Abdes”’ (‘Afd#s). Further discussion of the name by Jno. MacCarthy in Notes and Queries, 11 S. vii. 381; viii. 109, 291, 340 (17 May, 9 Aug., 11, 25 Oct., 1913), to which my attention was called by L. R. M. Strachan.
5. The complete inscription runs :—
Tib. Iul. Abdes. Pantera. Tiberius Julius Abdes Pantera, Sidonia. ann. LXII. of Sidon, aged 62, stipen. XX XX. miles. exs. a soldier of 40 years’ service, coh. I. sagittariovum. of the 1st cohort of archers, ἢ. 5. 6. lies here.
4 The cohort of archers in which the Sidonian served had come to the Rhine in the year 9 Α.Ὁ.
, early Imperial Period,
h.
Xreuznac
T
Now at
a = a pe} ta o a0 a [5 Ε ο inl & oO a ο 8 D
Fic. 8.—Tomb
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 75
newly discovered texts which one may seek in vain in the dictionaries. It is equally natural that many words can only be found a few times, sometimes only once, in the whole body of the texts known to us. Nobody with common sense will suppose that these were all coined by the writers on the spur of the moment : they are little discoveries for the lexicographer, it is true, but not inventions by the authors.! Such little discoveries can be made, to a certain extent, in the Greek Bible. The advocates of the theory of “‘ Biblical ”’ Greek have often made capital out of them. Cremer was especially fond of distinguishing these erratics as “ Biblical ” or ‘‘ New Testament ’’ words which were specially due to the power of Christianity to mould language. Even Grimm, in his edition of Wilke’s Clavis Novi Testamenti, was always careful to mark the rarities as ‘‘ vox solum biblica,’’ ‘‘ vox mere biblica,” ‘‘ vox profanis ignota,” thus creating every- where the impression that “‘ Biblical Greek ”’ could after all be discovered somehow by means of the lexicon.?
In quite a number of cases, however, there are intrinsic reasons for saying at once: It is a mere accident of statistics that this word has been found hitherto only in the Bible. In other cases it is possible to prove directly from some neglected or newly discovered author, from inscriptions, ostraca, Or papyri, that the word does after all belong to “ profane,” 1.6. general Hellenistic, Greek. Such is the ‘case, for instance, with the following supposed “ Biblical’ or ‘“‘ New Testament ’’ words and combinations : ἀγάπη, ἀκατά-
1 In Greek phrase I should say that they are ἅπαξ εὑρημένα, not ἅπαξ εἰρημένα.
2 The English edition of Grimm’s Wilke by J. H. Thayer, the best New
Testament dictionary hitherto produced (corrected edition, New York, 1896), is more cautious here in the text; cf. Gdttingische gelehrte Anzeigen, 1898, . 922. 8 The example found by W. H. P. Hatch, p. 22, n. 3 above, is doubtful. See however Neue Bibelstudien, p. 26f., Bible Studies, p. 198. (Philo); to which add Epistle of Aristeas, 229. Wilhelm Crénert told me (postcards, Gottingen, 26, 30 July, and 6 August, 1908) that he conjectured with great probability ἀγάπη in a MS. of Philodemus (90-40 B.c.) among the Herculanean rolls at Naples. Details were reserved by him for later. Since then, in his new edition of Passow’s Lexicon (Passows Wérterbuch der griechischen Sprache, vollig neu bearbeitet von W. Crénert, first instalment, Géttingen, 1912, col. 25), he has given the reference: Philodem. παρρ. 13, δι᾿ ἀ[γ]άπης ἐϊναρ]γοῦς with the note “" (certain?) ’ appended. Extraordinarily important instances of the extra-Biblical use of ἀγάπη were furnished next by the great prayer to Isis in the Oxyrhynchus Papyri XI No. 1380 (written early in the 2nd century A.D.,
γα. LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
γνωστος, ἀντιλήμπτωρ, Baiov, δειγματίζω, ἐχαιών, ἔναντι, ἐνώπιον, εὐάρεστος, εὐΐλατος, ἱερατεύω, καθαρίξω, κυριακός, λειτουργικός, λογεία, νεόφυτος, ὀφειλή, περιδέξιον, ἀπὸ πέρυσι, ποταμοφόρητος, προσευχή, πυρράκης, σιτομέτριον, φρεναπάτης.ἷ
It will perhaps be objected, What are they among so many? What is this secularisation of 21 “ Biblical ” or “New Testament’ words in comparison with the large number of cases in which no secular parallel has yet been found to characteristic peculiarities of the Greek Bible or New Testament? To this it must be replied that the number of specifically New Testament words at any rate has been enormously overestimated by all the statisticians.
The chief of those who have taken up this statistical problem in recent years is H. A. A. Kennedy; but he himself, as he tells me,? is no longer prepared to insist on his figures. Out of 4,829 New Testament words (excluding proper names and words derived therefrom) he formerly reckoned 580 3 or in round numbers 550 ὁ to be “ Biblical,” 1.6. ‘‘ found either
but the text should be older): according to 1. 28 Isis was called ἀγάπ[η] “Love” in the town of Thonis on the north coast of Egypt, and according to 1. 109 ἀ[γά]πη θεῶν “ Love of the gods ἴῃ Italy. This is very remarkable and instructive, even when taken in connexion with 1. 63, according to which Isis was called ἀλήθια (ἀλήθεια ‘ Truth’) at Menuthis, a village in northern Egypt. The Johannine parallels with ἀγάπη and ἀλήθεια at once suggest themselves (1 John iv. 9, 16; John xiv. 9). The Isis texts seem altogether to be specially valuable for the light they shed on the Johannine.—That the examples of ἀγάπη in the Isis papyrus-‘may be regarded as trustworthy, although the papyrus is injured in both places, is proved, I think, by the parallel as to fact in 1. 94: at Dora (Tantura, near Caesarea, in Palestine) Isis was called «φιλία. The two damaged ἀγάπη passages also afford each other mutual support. [In the new Liddell and Scott, 1925, 5.0. ἀγάπη : ‘‘ doubtful in Berlin Papyrus 9859 (2nd cent. B.c.); Philodemus, περὶ παρρησίας, ed. A. Olivieri, Leipzig, 1914, p. 52; of the love of husband and wife, Scholia in Ptolemaei Tetrabiblon, Basel, 1559, p. 52. TR.]
1 For ἔναντι and φρεναπάτης cf. Blass, Grammatik des Neutestamentlichen Griechisch,* pp. 129, 71. [English translation,? pp. 128 ἢ. 1, 68 ῃ. 2. TR.] (In his first edition Blass had also quoted φιλοπρωτεύω from an inscription, and I unfortunately relied on this in my article in the Realencyclopadie,? but it afterwards proved to be an error.) Quotations will be found for Batov and δειγματίζω in Moulton and Milligan’s Vocabulary, for ποταμοφόρητος in Wikenhauser (see p. 49 above), and for the remaining words in my Bibelstudien and Neue Bibelstudien (= Bible Studies).
2 Letter, Toronto, 13 October, 1908.
3 Sources of New Testament Greek : or the Influence of the Septuagint on the Vocabulary of the New Testament, Edinburgh, 1895, p. 62.
4 Page 93.
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 77
in the New Testament alone, or, besides, only in the Septua- gint.” These figures were-no doubt obtained from the lists in Thayer’s Lexicon. At the end of that volume we find, among other statistical information, a list of ‘ Biblical, 1.6. New Testament” words, 767 in number. From these, however, Thayer himself excepted 76 words as “ late” (i.e. known to be used.elsewhere) and 89 as doubtful, leaving 602. But if we subtract from 767 the total number of words (some 218) in the list which Thayer himself notes as occurring in Polybius, Plutarch, and elsewhere, there remain only 549. That is approximately Kennedy’s number, and is certainly a considerable amount. ;
But we must examine more closely. Among the 550 remaining words we find first a number of proper names, then a quantity of Semitic and Latin transcriptions or borrowed words, then a series of numerals.!_ Finally, however, if we consult the excellent articles in the Lexicon itself, we shall find in the case of many of the words still remaining that there are quotations given from Josephus, Plutarch, Marcus Aurelius, etc. Thus, for example, out of 150 words enumerated by Kennedy * as occurring “only ᾿᾿ in the Septuagint and the New Testament, 67 are quoted by Thayer himself from pagan authors. The only explanation that I can see for the inaccur- acy in these old statistics is that most of the authors quoted for the 67 words are later in date than the New Testament. But are we to regard words as specifically ‘‘ New Testament ” words because they happen to make their first appearance” there? Did Plutarch, for instance, borrow words from the Bible? That is altogether improbable. The Bible and Plutarch borrow from a common source, viz. the vocabulary of late Greek.?
Other and much lower statistics can be obtained from Grimm’s edition of Wilke’s Clavis Novi Testamenti : he notes 253 words as “ Biblical.” 4 But even this census may be considered out of date.
1 E.g. δεκαδύο, δεκατέσσαρες, δεκαπέντε, δεκαέξ, δεκαοκτώ.
2 Page 88 ff. ᾿
3 Cf. Géttingische gelehrte Anzeigen, 1896, p. 766. I there mentioned the following words occurring in Plutarch : ἀποκάλυψις, γνώστης, ὁλοκληρία, πρόσκομμα, σαγήνη, ψιθυρισμός, μίσθιος, ταπεινόφρων, ἐνταφιάζω, ἐξυπνίζω, μακροθυμέω.
4 According to Wikenhauser, Bibl. Zeitschrift 8 (1910) p. 271.
78 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
That there are such things as specifically “ Biblical ᾿᾿ and specifically ‘‘ New Testament ” (or rather, “‘ early Christian ’’) words, I have never denied. No lengthy statistical investiga- tions as to usage are necessary in order to recognise these special words: a glance is sufficient. But when a word is not recognisable at sight as a Jewish or Christian new forma- tion, we must consider it as an ordinary Greek word until the contrary is proved.1_ The number of really new-coined words is in the oldest (New Testament) period very small. I esti- mate that in the whole New Testament vocabulary of nearly 5,000 words not many more than 50—fewer than that, more likely—will prove to be “‘ Christian’ or “ Biblical’ Greek words.” The great enriching of the Greek lexicon by Christ- ianity did not take place till the later, ecclesiastical period, with its enormous development and differentiation of dogmatic, liturgical, and legal concepts. In the religiously creative period which came first of all the power of Christianity to form new words was not nearly so large as its effect in trans- forming the meaning of the old words.
As we have said, a close examination of the ancient literary texts 5 alone leads to the secularisation of many words in
1 ἐπιούσιος is a case in point, in my opinion, notwithstanding the. well- known remark of Origen. Asa rule little reliance is to be placed on observa- tions of the Fathers with regard to the statistics of language. Jerome, for example, in commenting on Gal. i. 12, was quite wrong in saying that ἀποκάλυψις was a Biblical word, never employed by any of the world’s wise men. Cf. R. C. Trench, Synonyms of the New Testament, 7th ed., London, 1871, p. 333 (§ xciv). émovotos has all the appearance of a word that originated in the trade and traffic of the everyday life of the people (cf. my hints in New#esta- mentliche Studien Georg Heinvict dargebracht, Leipzig, 1914, p. 118f.). [The opinion here expressed has been confirmed by A. Debrunner’s discovery - (Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 1925, col. 119) of ἐπιούσιος in an ancient housekeeping-book, Flinders Petrie, Hawara, Biahmu, and Arsinoe, London, 1889, p. 34 (No. 35) 1, 20 = Preisigke, Sammelbuch griechischer Urkunden aus Agypten, Strassburg, 1915, No. 5224.
2 [ therefore estimate the total of ‘‘ Biblical ’’ words in the New Testament as (at the utmost) 1 per cent. of the whole vocabulary. According to Grimm it should be estimated at 5} per cent., according to Kennedy (p. 93) at 12 per cent.
3 The medical, astrological and legal writers especially have not yet been thoroughly examined, and will prove very productive. Quite astonishing lexical parallels to the Bible are found, for instance, in a writer of whom I make repeated use later on in these pages, the astrologer Vettius Valens of Antioch, who wrote in the 2nd century a.p. Cf. Guilelmus Kroll, Mantissa Observationum Vettianarum (Excerptum ex Catalogo codicum astvologorum graecorum, t. V. p. ii.), Bruxelles, 1906, p. 152 ff.; and G. Warning, De Veitit
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 79
Thayer’s “ Biblical’ list, when it is agreed to drop the petty quibble that pagan authors of, say, the second century A.D. do not come into account. It is a weak point in Cremer’s Lexicon especially that ‘‘ late ᾿᾿ pagan parallels to New Testa- ment words are apt to be treated with a certain.contempt whereas in reality the “‘ late ” parallels to the New Testament, which is itself ‘‘ late,” are much more instructive than those from Homer or Plato.
The number of “ Biblical’’ words shrinks, however, still further if we pursue the search among our non-literary texts. From the immemorial homes of Greek culture in Hellas and the islands, from the country towns of Asia Minor and the villages of Egypt no less than from the great centres of com- merce on the Mediterranean and the Black Sea, year after year brings us new illustrations. Non-Christian texts are found containing words that were formerly—although “‘ the kingdom of God is not in word ’’—thought to pertain exclu- sively to Primitive Christianity or the Old and New Greek Testaments.
In proof that the list given above 1 can already be largely increased I will here give a number of examples, beginning with τὸ words which would assert their secularity at first glance, even if no quotations were forthcoming from extra- Biblical sources.
(x1) The word ἀλλογενής, “οἱ another race, a stranger, foreigner,” found frequently in the Septuagint and once in the New Testament (Luke xvii. 18), is said by Cremer ? and the other lexicographers to be ‘‘ confined to Biblical and patristic Greek.” The Roman authorities? however, in
Valentis sermone, Diss. Minster i. W., 1909. On Kroll’s edition of Vettius Valens (Vettit Valentis Anthologiarum libri, Berlin, 1908) cf. J. L. Heiberg, Deutsche Literaturzeitung, 29 (1908) col. 1764 ff. As to the medical writers, a distinguished authority, Johannes Ilberg (letter, Leipzig, 31 Aug., 1909), expressly confirms my statement. [For the new edition of Liddell and Scott’s Lexicon, publication of which ‘began in 1925, all the extant remains of Greek medical literature have been read—but not, of course, from this special point of view. TR.]
1 Page 75 f. 2 °Page 247.
3 Theodor Mommsen, Rémische Geschichte, V.,4 Berlin, 1894, p. 513, was of opinion that the ‘‘ tablets ” were not put up by the Jewish kings but by the Roman government. So too Dittenberger, Orientis Graeci Inscviptiones Selectae, II. p. 295.
80 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
placing inscriptions on the marble barriers of the inner courts of the Temple at Jerusalem, thought differently of the word, or they would not have employed it in a notice intended to be read by Gentiles, who were thereby threatened. with death as the penalty for entering. One of these inscriptions was discovered by Clermont-Ganneau in 1871. The stone on which it is cut—a substantial block,! on which the eyes of Jesus and St. Paul? may often have rested—is now in the Imperial New Museum at Constantinople (Figure 9). The inscription 3 is as follows :—
Μηθένα ἀλλογενῆ εἰσπο- Let no foreigner enter within pever Gan * ἐντὸς τοῦ πε- the screen and enclosure sur- Ν XN ἃ » 7 Ν * epee ks τρυφᾶκτου καὶ rounding the sanctuary. Who- περιβόλου. ὃς δ᾽ ἂν λη- ; τ ἀν κα Brae pe Uae are soever is taken so doing will φθῆ, ἑαυτῶι αἴτιος ἔσ- : - ταὶ διὰ τὸ ἐξοκόλου: be the cause that death over- θεῖν ® θάνωτον: ] taketh him. ᾿
It isremarkable that Josephus, in mentioning this ordinance, does not use our word, but two others. He does, however, employ the word (Bell. Jud. 2, 417) in another connexion.
1 One reads generally of a “‘ tablet’; but it is a limestone block, 22} inches high, 33} inches long, and 14} inches thick. The letters are more than τῇ inch high. I inspected the stone on 1o and 11 April, 1906 (it was then in Chinili Kiosk), and it seemed to me that I could detect signs of the letters having been formerly painted. ‘‘ If the tablet really bears the marks of blows from an axe, they must have been done by the soldiers of Titus ’’—this con- jecture of Mommsen’s, p. 513, seems to me very improbable.
2 It will be remembered that in consequence of an alleged breach of this regulation by St. Paul, who had taken Trophimus into the inner precincts, a tumult arose, and the apostle was then arrested, Acts xxi. 28 f.
3 It has often been printed, most recently by Dittenberger, Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae, II. No. 598; references to previous literature will be found there and in Schiirer, II. p. 272 1. [Jewish People in the Time of Jesus Christ, translated by Sophia Taylor and Peter Christie, Div. II., Vol. I’, Edinburgh, 1885, p. 265 ff.] Cf. also Moulton and Milligan, The Expositor, February 1908, p. 179. There is a squeeze of it in the New Testament Seminar, Berlin.
4 The imperatival infinitive is common in edicts and notices (as-in German). Cf. Bibelstudien, p. 260; Bible Studies, p. 344; and E. L. Hicks, The Collection of Ancient Greek Inscriptions in the British Museum, Part III. p. 176. j
5 ἐξακολουθέω is one of the words counted as ‘‘ Biblical’ by Thayer in his list, although in his text he gives quotations for it from Polybius, Plutarch, etc.
ὁ ἀλλόφυλος and ἀλλοεθνής. The passages are Collected by Dittenberger, op. cit. p. 295 (Bell. Jud. 5,193; 6,124; Antt. 15, 417). Further quotations in Schirer, II.* p. 272 [Eng. trans., Div. II., Vol. 15, p. 265.]
Fic. 9.—Limestone Block from the Temple of Herod at Jerusalem, inscribed with a warning notice. Early Imperial Period. Now in the Imperial New Museum at Constantinople.
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 81
If we suppose the warning notice owed its phrasing to the Jewish authorities, that would prove nothing against the view I have taken of this word. There is nothing whatever specifically Jewish about it either in sense or form.!
(2) One can scarcely repress a smile on discovering in Thayer’s ‘‘ Biblical’’ list the word ὀνεκός, “ of or belonging to an ass,” which seems anything but “ Biblical” or “ Christian,” though it is true that oxen and asses are animals mentioned in the Bible, and the word was only known in Matt. xviii. 6 and Mark ix. 42 in the expression for “a mill- stone turned by an ass.”” We find the word, however, exactly in the time of Christ in a Fayim contract for the loan of an ass, dated 8 February, 33 A.D.,2 and again exactly in the time when the gospels were being written, in another Egyptian document relating to the sale of an ass, dated 5 February, 70 A.D.2 Moreover, in the scale of taxes at Palmyra, recorded on stone in 136-137 A.D.,‘ there is twice mention of a tax on an ass’s burden of goods. The gospel word is thus given both a southern and an eastern setting, and is doubtless to be regarded as belonging to the colloquial language of every-day life. It survives in the Middle Greek τὸ (6)m«ov, which is still in dialectal use, for instance in the island of Carpathus.*®
(3) βροχή, “a wetting, rain,” is described by Thayer in his article as a late® word, but nevertheless isolated in his “ Biblical” list. A lease among the Oxyrhynchus Papyri (No. 280;), of the year 88-89 A.D., uses it to mean irrigation by the overflowing of the Nile.” This one quotation
1 It is the opposite of αὐθιγενής, which is a similar formation and good Greek.
2 Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 9122, τὰ ὀνικὰ κτήνη, “ the asses,” referring to an ass and her foal.
3 Les Papyrus de Genéve transcrits et publiés par Jules Nicole, Genéve, 1896 and 1900, No. 23st, ἀπὸ τῶν ὑπαρχόντων ἡμῖν ὀνικῶν κτηνῶν ὄνον ἕνα pudxpour, “ of the asses belonging to us, one mouse-coloured ass.””
4 Dittenberger, Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae No. 629.945 yopou ὀνικοῦ.
5 Hesseling, Byzantinische Zeitschrift, 8 (1899) p. 149.
86 [It is not even late. It is found in writers as early as Theophrastus (4th cent. B.c.) and Democritus (5th cent. B.c.). See the new edition of Liddell and Scott’s Greek Lexicon, Part 2, Oxford, 1926. TR.]
? The document mentions βροχαὶ τέσσαρες, ‘‘ four waterings " of a piece of land. Cf. H. van Herwerden, Lexicon Graecum Suppletorium et Dialecticum, Lugduni Batavorum, 1902, p. 163. Further details in Moulton and Milligan,
Vocabulary, p. 118.
82 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
is enough to show that the word formed part of the living language. It is therefore quite justifiable to refer to its existence in Modern Greek.1 The present-day language has not taken the word from the Bible, but the Bible and Modern Greek have both drawn from one common source—the ancient colloquial language.
(4) κόκκινος, “ scarlet,’ an adjective frequently occurring in the Greek Old and New Testaments, is included in Thayer’s list of “‘ Biblical’’ words, though a good deal of ingenuity would be needed to say why the Biblical language required this special expression. Thayer himself, however, gives quotations for the word from Plutarch and Epictetus ?; he must have placed it in his exclusive list because he considered these two authors to be late, and almost post-Biblical. The occur- rence of the word, therefore, in the papyri* and in an older contemporary of the Septuagint that the papyri have restored to us, Herondas (vi. 19),4 is not without importance.
(5) In astonishment at finding in Thayer’s list of “‘ Biblical ’’ words ἐνδιδύσκω, “I put on,” which, though it occurs in the Septuagint and the New Testament, is a perfectly colourless expression, in no way deserving this sacred isolation,’ we turn to Thayer’s article on the word and find at least one quotation from Josephus. As Josephus, however, was a Jew, and may therefore seem to border on the “‘ Biblical,’ ὁ we welcome an undoubted quotation from a profane source,’ and yet con- temporary with the Septuagint, viz. an inscription from Delphi, civca 156-151 B.c.8
(6) ἱματίξω, “I clothe,’ seems no less worldly than the
1 Kennedy, Sources, p. 153; Thumb, Die griechische Sprache, p. 226.
2 To these must be added Martial, a contemporary of the New Testament, who uses coccina (Epigr. ii. 39, etc.) for ‘‘ scarlet garments.”
3 Examples in P. M. Meyer, Griechische Papyrusurkunden dey Hamburger Stadtbibliothek, I. (1911) p. 40.
4 Herondae Mimiambi iterum edidit Otto Crusius, Leipzig, 1894, p. 47, τὸν κόκκινον βαυβῶνα. Further details in Moulton and Milligan, Vocabulary, Ρ. 352.
5 Cf. ἱματίζω, no. 6 below.
6 Philologically this statement could only be accepted with great reserva- tions.
7 Van Herwerden, Lexicon, pp. 270 and 271.
8 Sammlung der griechischen Dialekt-Inschviften, herausgegeben von H. Collitz, II., Géttingen, 1899, No. 1899,, = Dittenberger, Syiloge,? No. 85713 ἐνδυδισκόμενος (sic; a stonemason’s error), ‘‘ clothed.” The statement of Johannes Baunack, in Collitz, that ἐνδιδύσκω in the New Testament means ‘“‘ make to put on ” is not correct. :
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 83
last word, which indeed it resembles in meaning; hut because it was only known to occur in Mark v. 15 and Luke viii. 35 it appears in Thayer’s “‘ Biblical” list. The Primitive Christians, however, had no call to invent new terms con- nected with dress, and so this word is of course secular in origin. It is found in one of the pre-Christian Serapeum documents, 163 B.c.?; again later,? a welcome parallel to the New “Testament,” it occurs among the Oxyrhynchus Papyri‘* in the testament of a man who could not write his own name, Dionysius the son of Harpocration, 117 a.D., clearly in formular phraseology,’ which comes again in similar form in an instrument of adoption from Hermupolis, 31 December, 381 A.D.§
(7) ὀπτάνομαι, “1 am seen, I let myself be seen,” Acts i. 3, is in Thayer’s list of “ Biblical” words, although E. A. ‘Sophocles ? had quoted it from the so-called Hermes Trisme- gistus.§ More important are the examples now known from two much older Ptolemaic papyri® (Paris No. 40.3, circa 160 Β.0.19; and Tebtunis No. 24;, 117 B.C.),4 which prove that the word was at any rate current in Egypt and explain the Septuagint usage (1 Kings viii. 8; Tobit xii. 19) in the most direct manner.
1 χ Peter iii. 3, 4.
2 Greek Papyvi in the British Museum, ed. F. G. Kenyon,.No. 24,,, Vol. I. P- 32, ἱματιεῖ αὐτήν, ‘ will clothe her.’ Iam indebted to Mayser’s Grammar - of the Papyri, pp. 93, 465, for this passage.
3 Cf. van Herwerden, Appendix, p. 107.
4 No. 4899 and 17-
5 The children of a female slave are twice mentioned as having been ‘‘ fed and clothed ” by the testator’s wife, ἐκγόνων τρεφομένων καὶ ἱματιζομέϊνων] ὑπ᾽ αὐτῆς (line 17).
6 Archiv fair Papyrusforschung, 3, p. 17416 (a Leipzig papyrus, published by L. Mitteis), θρέψω καὶ ἱματίζω εὐγενῶς καὶ γνησίως ὡς υἱὸν γνήσιον καὶ φυσικόν, “Το will feed and clothe him nobly and properly as a proper and natural son.” The passage is noted by van Herwerden in the Mélanges Nicole, Genéve, 1905, p. 250. Further details in Moulton and Milligan, Vocabulary, p. 304.
7 Greek Lexicon of the Roman and Byzantine Periods, New York and Leipzig, 1888.
8 Poemander 31,15.
® Pointed out by Mayser, p. 404; cf. also J. H. Moulton, The Expositor, February 1903, p. 117. ;
10 Notices et extraits des manuscrits de la Bibliotheque impériale, Vol. 18, Part 2, Paris, 1865, p. 320. The papyrus, which is of a very vulgar type, has ὀπτάεται (510). :
11 The date 114 in Mayser is an error. The text is mutilated, but μηδαμῶς ὀπτανομένων is clear.
84 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
(8) ἐλλογέω, “I put down to someone’s account, I reckon, impute,”’ Philemon 18, Romans v. 13, is one of those words that have as worldly a look as possible. Thayer, however, in his ‘‘ Biblical’’ list separates it off from all other Greek, although in his article on the word he quotes pagan inscrip- tions! containing it. A new 3 and earlier reference is supplied by a military diploma (imperial letter) on papyrus, written at Alexandria (?) in the time of Hadrian.’
(9) In defiance of the note “ Inscr.”” appended to the word, περισσεία, “ abundance, superfluity, surplus,” also figures in Thayer’s “ Biblical” list. But the Thesaurus Graecae Linguae had already cited a supposed contemporary of the New Testament, “‘ Moschion the physician ” 4 and an inscrip- tion of the Imperial period from Sparta,* which is also referred to by Grimm and Thayer. If we are now obliged to delete here “‘ Moschion the physician’’® there comes as a new addition an inscription of 329 A.D. from Rakhlé in Syria.’
(10) ‘‘ Never in profane writers,” say Grimm ® and others of ἀναστατόω, “1 incite to tumult, stir up to sedition, unsettle,” another, Septuagint and New Testament word
1 Inscription from Daulis, 118 a.D., Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum, No. 1732a3;; and the edict of Diocletian, Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum, III. p. 836.
2 Cf. van Herwerden, Lexicon, p. 260.
3 Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 14037. It is now so dated by Wilcken, Hermes, 37 (1902) p. 84 ff. The Emperor writes οὐχ ἕνεκα τοῦ δοκεῖν με αὐτοῖς ἐνλογεῖν, which Theodor Mommsen (in Bruns, Fontes turis Romani,® pp. 381, 382) translated ‘‘ non ut iis imputare videar ’’ (as I was informed by Wilcken, in a letter dated Leipzig, 5 May, 1907). The Emperor wishes to avoid the appearance of imposing an obligation, or debiting the soldiers with the beneficium granted them. Cf. also Wikenhauser, Biblische Zeitschrift 8 (1910) p. 272, and Moulton and Milligan, Vocabulary, p. 204.
4 De pass. mul. p. 47,, referring to excess of nourishment. (But see note 6.)
5 Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum, No. 1378, concerning a certain president of the games, who “ handed over to the city the whole surplus of the money belonging to the presidents of the games,” τὴν περισσείαν ἀποδοὺς πᾶσαν τῇ πόλει τῶν ἀγωνοθετικῶν χρημάτων.
6 I owe to Johannes Ilberg (letter, Leipzig, 31 Aug., 1909) the information that this text is not ancient, but a late medieval translation of a Middle Latin book for midwives by one ‘‘ Muscio.” The ancient original that he followed, a physician named Soranus (c. 100 A.D.), has πλείονος τροφῆς παράθεσις (p. 283, 1 Rose). ,
7 Bulletin de Correspondance Hellénique, 21 (1897) p. 65, ἐκ περισειῶν (sic), "' from superfluous (money).”” The inscription, which was no new discovery in 1897, is not Christian.
8. Clavis,‘ Ὁ. 28.
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 85
which at first sight certainly has nothing Biblical or Christian about it, but seems altogether profane. Cremer, however, gives from the Thesaurus Graecae Linguae at least one quota- tion from Harpocration, a profane writer of the fourth 3 century A.D. But, as Nageli® pointed out, we find at any rate the word ἐξαναστατόω in a fragment of an anthology written about I00 B.c. (Tebtunis Papyri No. 2). Still more valuable is a passage in an Egyptian letter of 4 August, 41 A.D. (Berliner Griechische Papyrusurkunden, No. 1079594), where the word probably means the same as in the bad boy’s letter among the Oxyrhynchus Papyri (No. 119:0), of the second or third century A.D.5 The Paris Magical Papyrus 1. 2243 f. also contains the word, in a good sense.* We are therefore undoubtedly entitled to reckon it as part of the general secular vocabulary.’
I now add to these examples 22 words (nos. 11-32) which in some, way or other approach more. closely to the domain of religion and ethics, so that it was at least not impossible from the first that they might be peculiar to the Bible.
(II) ἀφιλάργυρος, “not covetous”’ (1 Tim. iii. 3; Hebrews xiii. 5), has been stated to be a ‘‘ New Testament word only,” and one might suppose it to be really Christian when one remembers how the Gospel is always antagonistic to mammon. But Nageli® has already quoted (besides certain authors that had been overlooked) an inscription from Athens, 36-35 B.c.,2 another from Istropolis, first century B.c.,1°
1 9Page 515.
2 Eduard Norden (letter, Gross-Lichterfelde W., 3 September, 1908) dates Harpocration earlier.
3 Page 48.
4 μὴ ἵνα ἀναστατώσῃς ἡμᾶς.
5 ἀναστατοῖ με, “ he drives me out of my senses,” Nageli, p. 47; or ‘‘he upsets
me,” Blass, Hermes, 34 (1899) p. 314. Cf. Chapter III. below, letter No. 19 (p. 202). For both papyri cf. also Moulton and Milligan, The Expositor, “March 1908, p. 268 f. ;
6 Edited by C. Wessely, Denkschriften der philosophisch-historischen Classe der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Vol. 36, Wien, 1888, Ὁ. ror : χαῖρε, ἱερὰ αὐγή, ἐκ σκότους εἰλημμένη, ἀναστατοῦσα πάντα, “hail! sacred radiance, thou that art taken out of darkness and causest all things to rise up.” Cf. Nageli, p. 47. =
7 Further examples in Moulton and Milligan, Vocabulary, p. 38.
8 Page 31. ᾿
® Michel, Recueil, No. 973g; = Dittenberger, Sylloge,? No. 732, 8110425.
10 Dittenberger, Sylloge,? No, 325, 7081.
86 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
and a papyrus (Oxyrhynchus No. 33 verso, 11.) of the second century A.D., in which either ἀφιλάργυρος or ἀφιλαργύρως occurs.! To these may now be added Soranus ? the physician (ctyca 100 A.D.) and a considerably earlier quotation for the adjective from an inscription at Priene (No. 137;), probably ‘of the second century B.c.
(12) wAnpodopéw, “I carry full, make full, fulfil,” according to Cremer ὃ found “ only in Biblical and teases Greek; elsewhere not till very late.” The earliest example hitherto discovered is in the Septuagint, Ecclesiastes viii. 11. The papyri,* however, show that this word, which occurs frequently in the New Testament, was at any rate used in Egypt at the same period and immediately afterwards. The earliest passages are: a letter from the Faytiim, now at Berlin, first century A.D.5; an Amherst papyrus, of 124 A.D.§; a Berlin papyrus, of 139 A.D.?; an Oxyrhynchus papyrus, of the end of the second century a.p.® If these Egyptian quotations are not sufficient, the astrologer Vettius Valens of Antioch, a contemporary of the last two, can help to increase the statistics. Considering the undoubted rarity
1 It is there said of the Emperor Antoninus Pius : τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἦ[ν] φιλόσοφος, τὸ δεύτερον adiddpyupos, τ[ὸ] τρίτον φιλάγαθος, ‘he was first a friend of wisdom, secondly not a friend of money, thirdly a friend of the good.” Asin - 1 Tim. iii. 3, the word occurs in a sort of list of virtues.
2 In his description of the ideal midwife (p. 174, 22 Rose). 1 owe the reference to Johannes Ilberg (letter, Leipzig, 31 Aug., 1909).
3 9Page 882.
4 Cf. Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 28 (1903), col. 593; J. H. Moulton, The Expositor, February 1903, p. 118 f., December 1903, p. 436; Nageli, p. 60; Lietzmann on Romans iv. 21 (the Wessely papyrus there cited is identical with the London papyrus afterwards referred to). Lietzmann states the semasiological problem well. [Liddell and Scott refer to Ctesias (ff. c. 398 B.c.), Pers. 39 ap. Photium; but in the opinion of Lightfoot (on Col. iv. 12) ‘‘ the passage from Ctesias in Photius (Bibl. 72) πολλοῖς λόγοις καὶ ὅρκοις πληροφορήσαντες Μεγάβυζον is not quoted with verbal exactness.”’ Tr.]
5 Berliner Griechische Urkunden No. 665 II,, ἐπληροφόρησα αὐτόν. The meaning is not certain; either ‘‘ I have convinced him,” or “ paid him.” ἢ
6 The Amherst Papyri No. 66 IIgs, ἵνα δὲ καὶ viv πληροφορήσω, “ but in order to'settle the matter thoroughly.” Moulton gives a similar explanation of the passage; the editors, Grenfell and Hunt, ‘‘ but now also to give you full satisfaction.”
7 Berliner Griechische Urkunden No. 747 Tes; αἰ[τ]οὐύμ[εἸνο[ς] πίλ]η[ρ]οφορε[1]ν, “asking them to settle the matter (?).”
8 Oxyrhynchus Papyri No. 509,0, τυγίχάϊνω δὲ πεπληροφορημένος τοῖς ὀφειλο- μένοις μοι, “1 ἃτὴ completely satisfied with regard to what was owing to me.”
® I. p. 43,, of Kroll’s edition. Before the book appeared the editor very
LANGUAGE: OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 87
of the word a later quotation in a “ profane’’ context is also worthy of note: in an inscription of the eighth century A.D. from Nicaea in Bithynia! the verb is used of the com- pletion of a tower.
(13) συναντιλαμβάνομαι, “1 take interest in (a thing) along with (others), take my share in, assist jointly,’ was first known to occur in the Septuagint. It occurs twice also in the New Testament, Luke x. 40 and Romans viii. 26, in the latter passage referring to the mediation of the Holy Spirit. Though it is used by the pre-Christian writer Diodorus of Sicily, and by Josephus,? it is included by Thayer in his “ Biblical” list, with the note “ Inscr.”’ appended, but without any quotation from inscriptions. We can trace the word, however, throughout the whole extent of the Hellenistic world of the Mediterranean. An inscription of the year 270 B.c. on the retaining-wall of the temple of Apollo at Delphi? construes it with the genitive, an inscription of Pergamum between 263 and 241 B.c.4 with εἰς, a papyrus letter from Hibeh in Egypt circa 238 B.c. with περί 5 Then comes the Septuagint, with various constructions ὁ; the Sicilian follows, with the genitive,’ while St. Luke and St. Paul use the word with the dative. These statistics are absolutely comprehensive geographically. Thus the word which, in the absence of proper evidence, was consigned to isolation, but which is in fact known to have been used at Delphi, in Asia, in Egypt, and by a Sicilian
kindly sent me the passage in Greek and German (letter dated Minster, (5 April, 1907) : iva διὰ τῆς κατοχῆς ταύτης τὸ τῆς συνοχῆς σχῆμα πληροφορηθῇ, “ἴῃ order that the συνοχή (predicted by the whole constellation) may fulfil itself (come to fulfilment) in this way.”
1 Athenische Mitteilungen, 24 (1899) p. 406, ἐπληρω[φόρη]σεν (sic), as read and interpreted by A. Koerte.
2° Antt. IV. viti.4; the word is, however, struck out in this passage by Niese.
3 Dittenberger, Sylloge,? No. 250, 5412, συναντιλήψεσθαι τῶν τῆι πόλει συμφερόν- των, “to help in things profitable unto the city.” Van Herwerden’s citation of this inscription, Lexicon, p. 780, is misleading.
4 Frankel, No. 182¢t., τοὺς εἰς ταῦτα συναντιλαμβανομένους, “᾿ those helping in this.”
5 The Hibeh Papyri No. 82,,%, καλῶς οὖν [π]οιήσεις συναν[τι]λ[α]μβανόμενος προθύμως περὶ τῶν εἰς ταῦτᾳ συγκυρόντων, ‘‘ thou wilt therefore do well to take part zealously in the things relating thereto.”
6 Sometimes with the genitive, sometimes with the dative; cf. Hatch and Redpath’s Concordance. ᾿
1 Diod. xiv. 8.
88 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
writer, might now serve as a school example of the unity and uniformity of the international Greek vocabulary.
(14) St. Paul in Philippians ii. 30 testifies of Epaphroditus that he had for the sake of the work of Christ come nigh unto death, having daringly exposed himself.1 The verb παραβολεύομαι, “1 expose myself,” here used in the aorist participle, has not been found in other writers, and was even in ancient times such a rare word that some copyists have altered it.2 Nevertheless, though placed by Thayer in his list, it is not a “ Biblical ’’ peculiarity. An inscription at Olbia on the Black Sea, probably of the 2nd cent. a.p.,3 in honour of a certain Carzoazus the son of Attalus, employs exactly the same participle in a similar context, and helps to elucidate the passage in Philippians, while itself receiving illumination from the New Testament..
(15) In x Tim. ii. 12 the woman is forbidden to “ have dominion over’’ the man. The word αὐθεντέω appears here for the first time in Greek literature, nor does it occur again except in ecclesiastical writers. Of course, therefore,
1 Literally: ‘‘ having offered himself with his soul.” [The R.V. has ‘‘hazarding his life.” Moffatt translates ‘‘ by risking his life.’’ Tr.]
2 Instead of παραβολευσάμενος they write παραβουλευσάμενος. [= the A.V. ‘‘ not regarding his life.’ Tr.]
3 Inscriptiones Antiquae Ovae Septentrionalis Ponti Euxini Graecae et Latinae ed. Basilius Latyschev, I., Petropoli, 1885, No. 2124-93, ἀλλὰ καὶ (μέχρι) περάτων γῆς ἐμαρτυρήθη. τοὺς ὑπὲρ φιλίας κινδύνους μέχρι Σεβαστῶν συμμαχίᾳ παραβολευσάμενος. Latyschev considers this a very obscure text (p. 54). I find not the least difficulty, if μέχρι (€ws?) περάτων is right: ‘‘ but also to the ends of the world it was witnessed of him that in the interests of friendship he had exposed himself to dangers as an advocate in (legal) strife (by taking his clients’ causes even) up to emperors.” παραβολευσάμενος governs the accusative τοὺς κινδύνους (cf. παραβάλλεσθαι τὸν κίνδυνον, Thuc. iii. 14, quoted in Pape’s Lexicon) and the dative συμμαχίᾳ (cf. τῇ ψυχῇ in the passage from St. Paul, and ψυχῇ καὶ σ[ὠ]ματι παραβαλλόμενος, inscription from the coast of the Black Sea, civca 48 a.D., Dittenberger, Sylloge,? No. 342, ®7623,; literary passages for παραβάλλομαι inThayer, 5.0. παραβολεύομαι, απὰ J.H. Moulton, Grammar, I. Ὁ. 64). Hence, “‘ by his advocacy he exposed himself to dangers.” The whole passage has a very “‘ New Testament’ ring. The ancient phrase πέρατα τῆς γῆς is also familiar to us from the Greek Bible. For the actual hyperbole itself cf. for instance the amiable exaggeration in Romans i. 8 and the emphatic expres- sions in Romans xv. 19.. The use of μαρτυρέομαι is quite as in the New Testament (Neue Bibelstudien, p. 93; Bible Studies, p. 265).—In the Theo- logische Rundschau, 9 (1906) p. 223, I quoted the inscription from van Herwerden, Lexicon, p. 622, unfortunately with his error in the reference: II. (instead of 1). For the ending -e¥w cf. Modern Greek βολεύω, which Hatzidakis, ᾽Αθηνᾶ 20, p. 102 f. (cf. Kretschmer, Glotta 2, p. 339), traces back to εὐβολεύω.
͵
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 89
it has been described as “only Biblical and patristic.” 1 Now, as: Nageli? points out, the word is twice used in a non-literary text, viz. a Christian papyrus letter of the 6th or 7th cent. A.D., No. 103 among the Berlin documents. A superficial observer will say this is a new proof that the verb is Christian. As a matter of fact its occurrence in the letter is much rather an indication of its popular character. And all doubt is removed by Moeris,* one of the late lexi- cographers among the ancients, who gives αὐτοδικεῖν as the Attic and αὐθεντεῖν as the corresponding Hellenistic word (in the Kow7). In the same way Thomas Magister 5 warns against the use of αὐθεντεῖν as vulgar, and recom- mends αὐτοδικεῖν instead. It is therefore probably a mere statistical accident that αὐθεντέω has not been met with earlier than in the New Testament; any day may bring us an ancient ‘“‘ profane’’ quotation.’
(16) διαταγή, ‘disposition, ordinance’”’ (Ezra iv. 11; Rom. xiii. 2; ‘Acts vii. 53) is said to be “ purely ” Biblical and patristic: the ‘‘ Greeks ” use instead διάταξις.8 Never- theless E. A. Sophocles® noted the word in Ruphus of Ephesus, a physician who flourished about 100 A.D. (so that he may well have been a contemporary of the physician
1 Grimm, Thayer, etc., s.v. 2 Page 49.
3 The precise meaning is not completely clear, but the general idea of ἐκ being master ” seems to me to be decisive in this passage also.
4 Page 58 of J. Pierson’s edition, quoted by Nageli, p. 50.
5 Page 18, 8 of Ritschl’s edition, quoted by Nageli, p. 49 f. This is not the medieval lexicographer’s own wisdom, but borrowed from his predecessors.
6 Cf.-Moulton and Milligan, The Expositor, October 1908, p. 374; Jean Psichari, Efendi, Extrait des Mélanges de philologie et de linguistique offerts ἃ M. Louis Havet, Paris, 1908, p. 412 ff.; L. Gernet, Addévrns, Revue des études grecques, Janv.-Févr. 1909; Ernst Fraenkel, Zeitschrift fiir vergleichende Sprachforschung 43, p. 214; and especially P. Kretschmer, Glotta 3, p. 289 ff.; also Moulton and Milligan, Vocabulary, p. 91.
? [This expectation is now fulfilled. The. new Liddell and Scott, Part 2 1926, cites αὐθεντέω πρός twa from the Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 1208,, (first cent. B.c.). In 1 Tim. ii. 12 the construction isd. τινός. TR.]
* Grimm and Thayer, s.v. Thayer certainly gives the note “" Inscr.” on Pp. 694.
9. Greek Lexicon of the Roman and Byzantine Periods.
10 In the Collectanea Medicinalia of the physician Oribasius, edited by Bussemaker and Daremberg, I. p. 5446, μόνον δὲ χρὴ τῇ ἐφεξῆς διαταγῇ τὸ σῶμα ἀνακομίζειν εἰς τὴν ἰδίαν τάξιν, “it is only necessary by a subsequent ordered way of living to bring back the body into proper order.’’ The French editors translate régime, qa. 6. “ diet.’”’ The word has here already undergone a change of meaning.
90 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
St. Luke). That this pagan physician should have picked up the word from the Christians is, I think, more improbable than that St. Paul and the Christian physician St. Luke knew it from its use among their medical contemporaries— if it was not known to them naturally apart from that. And in all probability it was so Known to them. The word is not merely a technical term in medicine: the astrologer Vettius Valens of Antioch, of the 2nd cent. A.D., also uses 1{.1
The inscriptions and papyri add their light. Nageli? quotes inscriptions from Sardis? (Roman period), and Pergamum‘ (date uncertain), and documents from the Oxyrhynchus Papyri dated respectively 335(?) a.D.6 and 362 A.D. To these we may add (beginning with the latest) a letter of 343-344(?) A.D.’ from the Fayim, an inscription from Irbid in the Hauran (238-239 a.D.),8 an inscription from Hierapolis® (2nd? cent. a.D.), and an inscription from Oenoanda in the south-west of Asia Minor (Imperial period).1° Of still greater importance, if rightly restored, is an inscription from ‘Antiphellus “ in Lycia (2nd ? cent. A.D.),
1 Catalogus Codicum Astrologorum Graecorum, V. 2 Pp. 51,46, κατὰ τὴν τοῦ κελεύοντος διαταγήν, ‘‘ according to the disposition of the person commanding.” I am indebted for the reference to W. Kroll (letter, Miinster, 5 April, 1907).
2 Page 38.
3 Corpus Inscriptionum Sica, No. 3465, a votive inscription, ἐκ τῆς διαταγῆς.
4 No. 358, a votive inscription, [ἐκ] διαταγῆς.
5 No. 92, order for payment of wine, ἐκ διαταγ(ῆς).
8 No. 93, order for payment of corn, ἐκ διαταγῆς. From these four passages we may conclude that ἐκ διαταγῆς, ‘‘ by order,” was a regular formula.
τ Fayam Towns and theiy Papyri, No. 133, ἵνα τὴν διαταγὴν τῆς τρύγης ποιήσηται (I take this as equivalent to ποιήσητε), “ that ye may make disposi- tion concerning the harvest.”
8 American Journal of Archaeology, 10 (1906) p. 290, διαταγῆ PA. Οὐήρου (or [Σε]ουήρου) ἐκ δημοσίου, ‘‘ by order of Flavius Verus (or Severus) from public money.”
9 Altertiimer von Hievapolis [see above, p. 14, ἢ. 1], p. 100, No. 78, εἴ τις παρὰ τὴν διαταγὴν τὴν ἐμὴν ποιήσι, “16 anyone doeth contrary to my ordinance.” Walther Judeich (ibd. p. 110) points out that in this and related inscriptions - from Asia Minor διατάσσεσθαι, διάταξις, διάταγμα, and διαταγή display the specialised meaning of ‘‘ determine by testamentary disposition,” etc., just like διατίθεσθαι, etc. This use was also known to St. Paul: his ἐπιδιατάσσεσθαι (Gal. ili. 15) also refers to a testament.
10 Reisen im stidwestlichen Kleinasien [see above, p. 17, n. 1], II. p. 180, No. 231, κατὰ τὴν Σειγηλάσεος (510) διαταγήν, “ by order of Seigelasis.”
™ Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum, No. 4300,, with the reading on p. 1128: [ὑπ]εύθυνος ἔσται τοῖς διὰ τῶν θείων δια[ταγ]ῶν ὡρισμένοις, “ΗΘ will be liable to the (penalties) appointed by the divine ordinances.”
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT gi
in which G. Hirschfeld (rightly, I think) explains τῶν θείων δια[ταγ]ῶν as “imperial ordinances.” 1 This would be a most exact parallel to the celebrated passage in the Epistle to the Romans, which also refers to the Roman authorities.
As we review the statistics? we repeat the observation already hinted above: we see unity and uniformity prevailing in the use of words wherever the international language was written. A supposed Biblical word can be traced in the Imperial period from one stage to another through the countries bordering on the Mediterranean : from Pergamum, Sardis, Ephesus, Hierapolis, by way of Oenoanda, Lycia, and Cilicia (St. Paul), to Antioch, the Hauran, and the little country towns of Egypt. And in Egypt we found what is at present the oldest example of all, the Septuagint Ezra iv. 11.
(17) πρωτότοκος, “ firstborn,” occurs frequently in the Septuagint and in important religious utterances of the New Testament. Thayer quotes it twice from the Anthology, but nevertheless leaves it in his list of ‘‘ Biblical”’ words. It is of some importance therefore to find in Trachonitis, on the undated tomb of a pagan “ high priest ᾿᾿ and “ friend of the gods,” a metrical inscription, mutilated indeed, but plainly showing this word.* It is noteworthy that we have here, as in the Anthology, a poetical text. Another metrical epitaph from Rome,‘ Christian, and not much later than
1 Further details in Judeich, who does not accept this explanation, but thinks rather of some private document left by the owner of the tomb. But in that case how is θείων to be explained? θεῖος, ‘‘ divine,’ has in countless passages the meaning of ‘‘imperial,” just like the Latin divinus. See Chapter IV. below, p. 347. Cf" διατάσσομαι, Acts xviii. 2, with reference to the edict of Claudius. :
2 Ludwig Mitteis (letter, Leipzig, 21 May, 1908) refers me further to the Leipzig Papyrus No. 97 III;, Xs, XIII,, XVII,, (in his edition). More details in Moulton and Milligan, Vocabulary, p. 155.
3 Epigrammata Graeca ex lapidibus collecta ed. Georgius Kaibel, Berolini, 1878, No. 460, tpeds γάρ εἰμι πρωτοτόκων ἐκ τελεθ[ ὧν 1] (=7eAer dv] ?), ‘‘ for lam a priest by the rites of the firstborn.’’ Kaibel thinks that in the family of the ' deceased the firstborn always exercised the office of priest. Cf. van Herwerden, Lexicon, p. 710. (Cf. Pindar, Ol. x. (xi.) 63, ἐν πρωτογόνῳ τελετᾷ mapéoray .. . Μοῖραι. TR.]
4 Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum, No. 9727 = Epigrammata ed. Kaibel, No. 730. For the word cf. also Wikenhauser, Biblische Zeitschrift 8 (1910),
Ῥ' 273.
92 LIGHT FROM, THE ANCIENT EAST
the second (?) or third century, uses the word with reference to a firstborn “sun-child”’ (1.6. child born on a Sunday) who died at the age of two years.
(18) συγκληρονόμος, “ fellow-heir,” is “ unknown in pro- fane Greek ’”’ according to Cremer.! He has just quoted Philo the Jew, who uses the word once, so we must suppose Cremer to be as broad-minded as the early Church in approximating Philo to Christianity. But even in quite pagan surroundings we encounter this word, the origin of which ‘in the legal terminology of the day is patent on the face of it. In an Ephesian inscription of the Imperial period? one C. Umphuleius Bassus mentions ‘“ Eutychis as fellow-heir.”’ If this woman was his wife, as is probable, this example is a specially fine illustration of 1 Peter iii. 7, where the wife is honoured as being (spiritually) a fellow-heir with her husband. Similarly an inscription? on a sarco- phagus from Thessalonica (Imperial period) speaks of “ fellow-heirs.”’
(19) The word δεκαιοκρισία “is found only in ecclesiastical and Biblical Greek, and that rarely,” says Cremer. This time it is interesting to notice that Cremer‘ has tolerantly admitted to Biblical (or ecclesiastical?) precincts the Testa- ments of the Twelve Patriarchs, in which the word twice occurs.5 Now on the fourth of the month Phamenoth, in the year 303 A.D., a certain Aurelius Demetrius Nilus, a former arch-priest of Arsinoé and undoubtedly a heathen, caused a petition to be written (for he could not write him- self §!) to the Praefect of Egypt, Clodius Culcianus, who is known to us from the time of the Diocletian persecution.
1 *Page 584. e
2 The Collection of Ancient Greek Inscriptions in the British Museum, III. No. 633 (p. 249), Edruyidos . . . . σ[υγ]κληρονόϊμου αὐτ]οῦ.
8. Athenische Mitteilungen 21 (1896) p. 98: συνκληρ(ονόμ)ων.
4 9Page 339. 5 Test. Levi 3 and 15.
5. Cf. line 11 of the petition, διὰ τὸ ἀγράμματόν pe εἶναι, “ because I cannot write.” [Cf. also p. 166, n..7, and p. 222 below. But allowance must some- times be made for the mock-modesty of the ‘‘ unlearned.” Does not Jordanes, ° the 6th cent. historian of the Goths, say of himself ‘‘ Ego item, quamvis agrammatus, Iordanis ante conversionem meam notarius ‘fui’ (Getica 50) ? In Old English charters the signatures are not autographs of the witnesses. This fact, however, and even the celebrated “ ignorantia literarum” of King Wihtred of Kent in the 8th cent. (J. Earle, Land Charters, p. 333) is no proof of their general inability to write. Tr.]
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 93
The petitioner appealed confidently, ‘‘ being of good hope to obtain righteous judgment from thy Magnificence.’”? In this passage the word δικαιοκρισία stands really for that which is the outcome of just judgment, viz. ‘‘a just sentence.” In Romans ii. 5 the radical meaning, ‘ just judgment,” 2 suffices, and Cremer’s discrimination between J
“judgment which does justice’ and “ judgment in accord- ance with justice’ is doubtless too fine.
(20) The word κατήγωρ, “ accuser’ (which also occurs as a borrowed word in the Talmud), is probably still regarded by most commentators on Rev. xii. 10 as a Biblical speciality traceable to a Hebrew? or Aramaic* adaptation of the Greek κατήγορος. The question why κάτήγορος is always used elsewhere in the New Testament is either not raised at all or tacitly answered by reference to the supposed strongly Hebrew character of the Revelation. We find the word, however, in a very vulgar magical formula in a British Museum papyrus (No. 124) of the fourth or fifth century A.D., where it refers not to the devil, as in the Biblical passage, but to human enemies. The papyrus itself is late; the formula, however, to judge by the analogy of other magical prescriptions, is older; and, in spite of the ' strongly syncretic character of the papyrus, there is nothing which points to a Jewish or Christian origin for this formula.®
1 The Oxyrhynchus Papyri No. 71 1,, εὔελπις ὧν τῆς ἀπὸ σοῦ μεγέθους δικαιοκρισίας τυχεῖν. The passage is referred to by Nageli, p. 48, and by Lietzmann on Romans ii. 5. The scribe who drew up this petition knew the word from official usage, not from the Bible. Further details in Moulton and Milligan, Vocabulary, p. 161.
2 Cf. 2 Thess. i. 5, τῆς δικαίας κρίσεως; John vii. 24, τὴν δικαίαν κρίσιν κρίνατε.
3 ΨΥ. Bousset on the passage in Meyer’s Commentary, XVI,® Gottingen, 1906, p. 342.
* P. W. Schmiedel, in his new edition of Winer’s Grammar, Gottingen, 1894, ὃ 8, 13 (p. 85 f.).
5 Greek Papyri in the British Museum, ed. F. G. Kenyon (Vol. I.), London, 1893, Pp. 122, θυμοκάτοχον πρὸς πάντας ποιῶν" ποιεῖ yap πρὸς ἐχθροὺς καὶ κατήγορας καὶ λῃστῶν (καὶ) φόβους καὶ φαντασμοὺς ὀνείρων, “ἃ charm to bind the senses, effective against everybody: for it works against enemies and accusers and fears of robbers and dream-spectres.”’ θυμοκάτοχον, which often occurs as a title to magical prescriptions, I take-(in the sense which κατέχω often has, cf. Chapter IV below, p. 306, n. 4) to mean that the enemy’s senses will be paralysed. [Eduard Norden, letter, Gross-Lichterfelde W., 3 September, 1908, makes the excellent suggestion to delete the third καί. The translation thus becomes “‘ fears of robbers” instead of ‘‘ robbers and terrors.’’] ©
® The formula next following has been influenced by Judaeo-Christian conceptions of angels.
94 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
The only thing that can be ascertained with certainty is the vulgar character of the formula, and the word κατήγωρ is also—as in the vulgar Greek Revelation of St. John—a vulgarism.!
The philologists who have discussed the word recently ? are doubtless on the right track: κατήγωρ is a vulgar ‘‘ back formation’ from the genitive plural κατηγόρων, on the analogy of ῥητόρων. Nearly all of them quote, among numerous vulgar formations of the same kind, the word διάκων (= διάκονος), and refer to the Charta Borgiana (191-192 A.D.) for the earliest example of .its use. The phenomenon in general is very old,* and in this- special case a much earlier example can be quoted: a papyrus letter from the Fayim, dated 4 December, 75 A.D., and now at Berlin, has the dative τῶι διάκωνι.5 It is therefore impos- sible to call διάκων “ late,”’ as Blass even did δ; or at least it is impossible in a New Testament Grammar, for this example is no doubt older than the Revelation.
(21) With regard to κατάκρισις, “condemnation,” Cremer? expresses himself somewhat more cautiously: “a word that appears to be found only in Biblical and ecclesiastical Greek.”” The appearance, however, was deceptive. Chris- tianity had no more need of a special word for ‘‘ condemna- tion ’’® than it has call to be jealous in claiming the sole possession of words for “‘a curse,” ‘‘ to curse,’’ and “‘cursed.’’®
1 Blau, Papyvi und Talmud, p. 17, suggests convincingly that the borrowed word sanegoy ‘‘defender, advocate,” in the Talmud is derived from a vulgar form συνήγωρῤ.
2 Wilhelm Schmid, Géttingische gelehrte Anzeigen, 1895, p. 42; Wochen- schrift fiir klassische Philologie, 16 (1899) col. 541 f., 18 (1901) col. 602; A. Thumb, Die griechische Sprache im Zeitaliey des Hellenismus, p. 126; P. Wendland, Byzantinische Zeitschrift, 11 (1902) p. 189; L. Radermacher, Rheinisches Museum fiir Philologie, New Series 57 (1902) p. 148; Neutesta- mentliche Grammatik, p. 15.
3 Even Schmiedel, in spite of his other statement.
4 Wilhelm Schmid, Wochenschrift fiir klassische Philologie, 18 (1901) col. 602.
5 Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 597,. The iota adscript in the article and elsewhere in the letter shows that the writer wished to be elegant; he no doubt considered the word διάκων to be good Greek. F. Rostalski (letter, Myslowitz, 13 Dec., 1911) refers me to Acta Johannis II. 1, p. 209.4, where there is MS. authority for διάκονες.
5 Grammatik des Neutestamenilichen Griechisch,* p. 30; [Eng. trans.,? p. 29, n. 2].
7 Page 610. 8 John 11]. 17. ® Cf. the following nos, 22, 23.
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 95
The ‘ Biblical” word! κατάκρισις is found more than once in the astrologer Vettius Valens of Antioch (second century A.D.).?
(22) ἀναθεματίξω, “I curse,’’ literally “1 devote (to the lower world) ’’ 3—there was surely no reason for the Bible religion to be particularly proud of having invented such a word, and yet according to Cremer‘ and other lexicographers it is found “only in Biblical and ecclesiastical Greek.” Among the ancient lead tablets published and discussed by Richard Wiinsch in the preface to his collection of Attic cursing-tablets 5 we find, however, one of the first or second century A.D., a heathen curse from Megara, now in the State Museum at Berlin, which throws a new light on the words ἀνάθεμα and ἀναθεματίζω. At the end of the whole formula there is a separate line of large letters® making up the word ANE@EMA, which is obviously a form of con- clusion—“ curse!” We find further in line 5 f. ἀναθεμα- τίζ[ομ]εν αὐτούς, in line 8 f. τούτους ἀναθεμα[τἤξομεν, and on the back, line 8 f., ἀναθεματί[ξ]ομεν τούτο[υς]: ‘‘ we curse them,” three times over. We must therefore say that ἀνάθεμα, meaning “curse,” belonged also to the pagan vocabulary, and that ἀναθεματίξω will have to be removed from the list of merely “ Biblical’ or ‘‘ ecclesiastical ”’ words. We may still reckon with the remote possibility
1 Thayer, in his list.
2 Iam indebted for the references to the kindness of W. Kroll (letter dated Minster, 5 April, 1907): Catalogus Codicum Astrologorum Graecorum, V. 2, P. 7334, here Valens speaks περὶ δεσμῶν καὶ συνοχῶν καὶ ἀποκρύφων πραγμάτων καὶ κατακρίσεως καὶ ἀτιμίας, “‘ about bonds and distresses and secret difficulties and condemnation and dishonour ”’; and in Kroll’s edition, I. 11735, he speaks of φθονικαὶ (Kroll: φονικαὶ 3) κατακρίσεις, ‘‘ condemnations for envy (murder ?).”’
3 For what follows cf. Zeitschrift fiir die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft, 2 (1901) p. 342; also Moulton and Milligan, Vocabulary, p. 33.
4 Page 1003.
5 Corpus Inscriptionum Atticarum, Appendix (= Inscriptiones Graecae, 111.
2) p. xiii f., and now accessible also in Wiinsch’s Antike Fluchtafeln, p. 4 ff. for in A. Audollent, Defixtonum Tabellae quotquot innotuerunt, Paris, 1904,
. 4B. Tr.J
° Cf. the facsimile, Joc. cit. p. xiii. aveBeya = ἀνάθεμα. The weakening of the accented a to ε is probably not without analogies. Nageli, p. 49, following a hint of Wackernagel’s, looks upon it as an example of vulgar Greek misplaced extension of the augment to a derivative; so also Wiinsch, Antike Fluch-- tafeln, p. 5, and Nachmanson, Beitrdge zur Kenntnis der altgriechischen Volkssprache, Upsala, 1910, p. 57, Rostalski (letter, 13 Dec., 1911) on the other hand notes ἐκαθέρισεν in Acta Andreae et Matthiae, II. 1, p. 77.
96 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
that the verb was first coined by Greek Jews: technical expressions in magic are of all places the most likely in which to assume that the international language had been influenced by Judaism.
(23) The classical Greek for ‘“‘ cursed ” is dpatos, ἐπάρατος, or κατάρατος. In the Septuagint we find κατάρατος rarely, but a fourth word, ἐπικατάρατος, occurs frequently. As it was met with elsewhere ‘“‘ only” in the New Testament, it has been reckoned among the words that are “ only” Biblical and ecclesiastical,—as though Christianity had any need to plume itself on the possession of this special word. But why the secular ‘words were not sufficient, and how far a “ Biblical ’’ distinction was secured by the ἐπί prefixed, these questions have never been raised. From the point of view of historical grammar the correct thing would have been to assume ἐπικαταράομαι and ἐπικατάρατος to be instances of those double compounds or ““ decom- posites ’’? which become more and more common in later Greek, and to regard ἐπί, therefore, as a late Greek, not a Biblical, feature. We are therefore not surprised to find the adjective used in a pagan inscription from Euboea 3 of the second century a.D.4 The inscription must be pagan, for the Erinyes, Charis, and Hygeia are named in it as goddesses. If it should be thought, on account of the Septuagint formulae occurring in this inscription,’ that Septuagint influence might account for ἐπικατάρατος, we can refer to a pagan inscription from Halicarnassus, of the second or third century A.D., now in the British Museum.’
1 Grimm and Thayer, s.v.
2 Cf. Wilhelm Schmid, Der Atticismus, IV. p. 708 ff.; Mayser, Grammatik dev griechischen Papyri, p. 497 ff.; Arnold Steubing, Dey paulinische Begriff “ Christusleiden,”’ a Heidelberg Dissertation, Darmstadt, 1905, Ὁ. 9.
5 Εφημερις Αρχαιολογικη, 1892, col. 173 ff.; Dittenberger, Sylloge,? No. 891. Cf. above, p..23, ἢ. 4.
4 ᾿Επικατάρατος ὅστις μὴ φείδοιτο κατὰ τόνδε τὸν χῶρον τοῦδε τοῦ ἔργου, " cursed whoever doth not spare this place with this work” (viz. a monument on a tomb).
5 Cf. above, p. 23, nm. 4.
® Nageli, who quotes this inscription (p. 60), is so cautious as to make this suggestion. It must be noted, however, that the extremely numerous ἐπικατάρατος passages in the Septuagint never employ the formula of the inscription, ἐπικατάρατος ὅστις. If the word were taken over from the Septuagint we should expect in this case the construction also to be borrowed.
1. Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum, No. 2664 = The Collection of Ancient
ΤΑΝΟΌΑΘΕ OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 97
(24) vexpow, “1 make dead, mortify,” is one of the “ Biblical’ words that Thayer even in his list secularises by reference to Plutarch, the Anthology, and inscriptions. In his article on the word he adds to these Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius, but he nowhere actually cites an inscrip- tion. He may have been thinking of the metrical epitaph of one M. Aurelius Eutychus (Athens, Roman period),} which employs the phrase “‘ body deceased’’ or “ dead body ” and thus furnishes an excellent parallel to Rom. iv. 19.
(25) ἀναξάω, “I live again, revive,’ which occurs several times in the New Testament, is regarded by Grimm, Thayer,? and Cremer as specifically a New Testament and ecclesiastical word. Cremer ὃ even explains why Christianity had to invent the word: ‘the ἀναβιῶναιν of profane Greek does not suit the soteriological sense of the Biblical ζωή."
Without raising the question why, if that were so, it was not necessary to find a substitute for the secular substantive ζωή, we are able in the first place to quote from Nicander,* a poet of the second century B.c., at least the verb ἀναζώω, which the lexicons describe as a poetical form of dvafdw. We find the Biblical word, however, in Sotion,® a narrator of marvels who possibly belongs to the first century a.D.,® and again in Artemidorus,’ an interpreter of dreams in the
Greek Inscriptions in the British Museum, IV. 1, No. 918, ef τις δὲ (the same collocation as in 1 Cor. viii. 2, Cod. 37; frequent also in the inscriptions of Hierapolis, cf. Altertiimer von Hievapolis, p. 201) ἐπιχειρήσι λίθον ἄραι ἢ λῦσαι αὐτό, ἤτω ἐπικατάρατος ταῖς προγεγραμμέναις ἀραῖς, ‘‘ but if anyone shall attempt to take away a stone or to destroy the monument, let him be cursed with the imprecations written above.”
1 Inscriptiones Graecae, 111. 2, No. 1355, “AvOpwme . . . μή μου παρέλθῃς σῶμα τὸ νεν[εἸκρ[ω]μένον, ‘‘man! pass not (unheeding) by my body dead!” Cf. van Herwerden, Lexicon, p. 555. ;
2 In his list of ‘‘ Biblical ’’ words Thayer adds to dvafaw the note “ Inscr,’’"— another of these remarkable contradictions in so exact a writer.
3 9Page 464.
4 Fragment in Athenaeus, IV. 11, 133 D, θερμοῖς δ᾽ ἰκμανθεῖσαι ἀναζώουσ᾽ ὑδάτεσσιν, “ Till that the warm rains fall, and moistened therewith they revive
. them.”
5 Παραδοξογραφοι Scriptores Rerum Mirvabilium Graeci ed. Antonius Wester- mann, Brunsvigae, 1839, p. 183, mapa Κιλικίᾳ φασὶν ὕδατος εἶναί τι σύστημα, ἐν ᾧ τὰ πεπνιγμένα τῶν ὀρνέων καὶ τῶν ἀλόγων ζῴων ἐμβραχέντα ἀναζῆν, ‘they say that in the neighbourhood of Cilicia there is a body of water, in which strangled birds and irrational creatures, if plunged therein, come to life.”
6. Westermann, Praefatio (p. L).
7 iv. 82, according to the reading of the Codex Laurentianus, preferred by the editor, J. G. Reiff, Leipzig, 1805. Here again the subject is the return to
98 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
second century A.D. A Cretan inscription 1 of unascertained date, which moreover requires restoration, was referred to by Nageli2 In the fifth century we still find the word avatdw used in a physical sense, as in the above-quoted passages, by the Christian writer Nilus*; and the late lexicographers of antiquity, quoted by Nageli, now supple- mented by the newly discovered fragment of Photius,‘ give it as a synonym for ἀναβιώσκομαι and ἀναβιόω.
Our conclusion, therefore, must be this :. avafdw, “1 live again,” is an international Greek word, and its radical (physical) meaning, which can be traced through many centuries, has been hallowed and given ‘an ethical content by Christianity. Cremer’s theory would reverse all this, and we should have to deplore the profanation of a “‘ Chris- tian” word.
(26) εὐπροσωπέω, “I look well, makea fair show” (Gal. vi. 12; and as a variant in the hexaplaric text 5 of Psalm cxl. [cxli.] 6), is described by Cremer ® as ‘‘ not discoverable in profane Greek.’’ We find it, however, in the letter of the Egyptian Polemon to his “ brother’? Menches (114 B.c.),’ clearly used no longer in the physical sense,® but (as by
life of one supposed to be dead. R. Hercher inserts the reading ἀναβιοῦν in the text of his edition, Leipzig, 1864.
1 Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum, No. 2566 = Sammlung der griechischen Dialekt-Inschriften, edited by H. Collitz and F. Bechtel, III. 2, Géttingen 1905, No. 4959, edited by F. Blass. A woman, ’Apyovixa, fulfils a vow to Artemis which she had made “ on coming to life again,” ἀναζῶσα. The text is not quite clear. Hiller von Gaertringen pointed out to me (letter, Berlin, Μεγαλοσάββατον [7.e., the Saturday before Easter, 30 March], 1907) that Blass has forgotten to print εὐχάν at the end.
2 Page 47.
3 In Photius, Bibliotheca, p. 5135, (quoted from the Thesaurus Graecae Linguae), of γὰρ κόκκοι μετὰ τὴν ἐκ σήψεως νέκρωσιν καὶ φθορὰν ἀναζῶσι, ‘‘ for the seeds come to life again after death and destruction by decay.”
4 Der Anfang des Lexikons des Photios, edited by R. Reitzenstein, Leipzig and Berlin, 1907, p. 107: ἀναβιώσκεσθαι' ἀναζῆν.
5 Ovigenis Hexaplorum quae supersunt conc. F. Field, t. II., Oxonii, 1875, Pp. 297, notes an ἄλλος who has εὐπροσωπίσθησαν and the variant εὐπροσώπησὰν. The Thesaurus Graecae Linguae (with false reference to ‘‘ Proverb.’’) describes εὐπροσωπίσθησαν, with doubtful correctness, as a contamination.
8 *Page 765. _ :
7 The Tebtunis Papyri No. 19..., ὅπως εὐπροσωπῶμεν, “50 that we may make « fair appearance.”” J. H. Moulton, The Expositor, February 1903, p. 114, called attention to this passage.
8. The physical meaning is of course the original one. We may imagine it so used by physicians. W. Pape’s Handworterbuch (2nd ed., 4th reprint,
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 99
St. Paul) with reference to winning the good opinion of one’s
neighbours.
(27) When St. Paul preached as a missionary in Athens he was suspected by Stoic and Epicurean opponents of being “a setter forth of strange gods: because he preached Jesus and Anastasis”” (Acts xvii. 18). The word καταγγελεύς “ proclaimer, herald, setter forth,” here placed in the mouth of the pagan philosophers, is according to Cremer 3 and others only found in this passage “ and in ecclesiastical Greek.” Even if no quotations were forthcoming from profane sources, this isolation of the word would for intrinsic reasons be highly questionable; for although the sentence containing it is in the Bible, it is not a “ Biblical’? but a pagan utterance, emanating from the pagan opposition, and of its authenticity Cremer can have had no doubt. A less hasty examination would have led to the recognition of the word as pagan on internal grounds. As a matter of fact it is found on a marble stele recording a decree of the Mytilenaeans in honour of the Emperor Augustus (between 27 and II B.C.).?
(28) In the First Epistle of St. Peter v. 3f. we read’: . . making yourselves ensamples to the flock. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive the crown of | glory that fadeth not away.”
The “ chief Shepherd ” of course is Jesus; the correspond-
_ing Greek word, ἀρχεποίμην, ἰ5 according to Cremer* unknown except in this passage. One is tempted to regard it as a Christian invention; some people, I daresay, detect a sort of official ring in the word. It is possible, however, to show that the apostle, far from inventing the word, was merely borrowing. A slip of wood (Figure 10) that once hung round
Braunschweig, 1866, p. 982) 5.0. refers to ‘‘ Galen,” ¢.e. the physician Galen of the 2nd century 4.D., but this is only by a cheerful misunderstanding of some preceding dictionary, probably Passow’s, which rightly refers to ‘‘ ep. Gal. 6, 12.” ‘Gal.’ it is true does also stand for ‘‘Galen’’ in Passow. Thus the Epistle to the Galatians has been turned into an epistle of Galen’s! There is some right instinct after all in the mistake, for the word was probably a medical expression to begin with.
1 Page 32.
2 Dittenberger, Ovientis Graect Inscriptiones Selectae, No. 456,9=Inscrip- tiones Graecae, XII. 2, No. 58,9, καταγγελεῖς τῶν πρώτων ἀ(χ)θησο[μένων ἀγώνων), ‘‘ heralds of the first games that shall be held.”
3. On this subject cf. Die Christliche Welt, 18 (1904) col. 77 f.
4 *Page 906.
100 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
the neck of an Egyptian mummy, of the Roman period, has been found with the following Greek inscription, designed to establish the identity of the deceased :—
Πλῆνις ? νεώ- Plenis the younger, chief Tepos ἀρχιποί- shepherd’s. Lived ... years. μενος. ἐβίω- σεν ἐτῶν...
The genitive here, “ chief shepherd’s,” is probably ἃ mere slip in writing,4 but the occurrence of such a slip is of some interest. Had the deceased been a person of distinction the inscription would have been more carefully executed. This label was hurriedly written for a man of the people, for an Egyptian peasant who had served as overseer of, let us say, two or three shepherds, or perhaps even half a dozen.5 If a reading of Carl Wessely’s ®° may be trusted, we have the same title again on another mummy-label;’ but I believe from the facsimile that the word is not really there. A Leipzig papyrus, however, of the year 338 a.D. also contains the word,® and the two undoubted examples are sufficient : they show “ chief shepherd ” to have been a title in genuine use among the people. Moreover, the Thesaurus Graecae Linguae had already quoted the word from the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs,? and Symmachus (c. 200 A.D.) uses
1 Cf. E. Le Blant, Revue Archéologique, 28 (1874) p. 249; the facsimile (see our Fig. 10) is in Plate 23, fig.14. I do not know where the tablet now is.
2 On the name cf. a hint in the Deutsche Literaturzeitung 1916, No. 31, col. 1399.
8 N. Bees in his edition of Nikolaus Miiller’s Inschriften vom Monteverde, p. 124, rightly explains this peculiar construction, of which there are other examples, as arising from contamination. In the present text he proposes to read erw v, ‘50 years’’; ἐτῶ would be equivalent to ἐτῶν (with loss of final v). Not impossible, but in my opinion improbable.
4 Prof. Kénnecke (letter, Braunschweig, 29 Aug., 1913) poco. that the original draft may have read ἀρχιποίμην ὃς ἐβίωσεν.
5 Wilcken (note on proof-sheets of the first edition of this book) ‘thinks he may have been the master of a guild of shepherds; ; for something similar see Wilcken, Ostraka, I. p. 332.
6 Mittheilungen aus dey Sammlung dey Papyrus Evzherzog Rainer, V., Wien, 1892, p. 17. Wessely reads ἀρχιποίμ(ην).
7 Also in Le Blant, p. 248; facsimile, Plate 21, fig. 9.
8 Ludwig Mitteis (letter, Leipzig, 21 May, 1908) referred me to the passage, No. 97 XI (in his edition).
9 Testamentum Judae, c. 8. The occurrence of the word has no bearing on the question of the Christian origin of this work.—At the present day the
Cees Sa
SS
Fic. 10.—Wooden Mummy-label from Egypt, Imperial Period.
By permission of M. Ernest Leroux, of Paris.
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT τοὶ
it in his version of 2 Kings iii. 4. The Christians called their Saviour “‘ the chief Shepherd,” but this was not crowning Him with jewelled diadem of gold: it was more like plaiting a wreath of simple green leaves to adorn His brow.
(29) προσκυνητής, “a worshipper,” is according to Cremer? “ unknown in pre-Christian Greek, and very rare afterwards, e.g. in inscriptions.” Which inscriptions are meant is not stated. The plural “ inscriptions ” is no doubt traceable to Passow or Pape s.v., where “ Inscr.” certainly means “ In- scriptiones,” though the plural must not be pressed. As a matter of fact the only inscription of which these lexico- graphers could have had knowledge must have been one of the third century A.D. from Baetocaece, near Apamea in Syria, reprinted from Chandler in the Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum (No. 447451), so that Cremer’s statement would seem to be about right.
In the addenda,? however, he informs us that “‘ the word was not entirely unknown in pre-Christian Greek,’’ and quotes an inscription (Waddington 3, 2720a) from the same place in Syria containing a decree? drawn up in the interests of “the worshippers that come up’’4 and communicated to the Emperor Augustus.
This inscription, however, is identical with the one referred to above; it has been repeatedly-discussed of late.5 Though carved in the third century this example of the use of προσκυνητής is really pre-Christian; the inscription in fact includes older documents: a letter of a King Antiochus, and the old decree that was sent to Augustus.
Other examples are at present unknown to me. I know no foundation for van Herwerden’s statement,® that the word is frequent in inscriptions and papyri.
Chélingas, the hereditary leaders of the pastoral Vlachs, are called ἀρχιποίμην by the Greeks (K. Baedeker, Greece,* Leipzig, 1905, p. xlix.). How old this title is, I cannot say.—The remark of the lexicographer Hesychius, that among the Cretans dpyiAAas was the name for the ἀρχιποίμην, shows that the word was in use at any rate in the time of Hesychius.
1 *Page 616. 2 Page 1120,
3 Cremer says “ petition.”
4 Τοῖς ἀνιοῦσει (sic; Cremer has ἀνιοῦσι) προσκυνηταῖς.
5 E.g. Dittenberger, Orientis Graecit Inscrviptiones Selectae, No. 262; Hans Lucas, Byzantinische Zeitschrift, 14 (1905) p. 21 ff.
® Lexicon, p. 702.
102 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
(30) προσκαρτέρησις, “ perseverance, constancy,”’ which the lexicons hitherto have quoted only from Eph. vi. 18, is strangely enough described by Cremer not as Biblical but as a ‘‘late’’ Greek word. This is because he here follows Pape, who marks the word as “ late” though he certainly can have known no example of its use outside the Bible. Thayer includes the word in his “ Biblical” list. It can now be
- quoted from two Jewish manumissions recorded in inscrip- tions at Panticapaeum on the Black Sea, one ? belonging to the year 81 A.D., and the other nearly as old. These inscrip- tions, I admit, will not do more than disprove the supposed “ Biblical” peculiarity of the word. There is perhaps still the possibility that προσκαρτέρησις was a Jewish coinage of the Diaspora, although I can see no obvious intrinsic reason for its being so.
(31) The Greek word used for the veil or curtain that separated the Holy Place from the Holy of Holies in the Temple at Jerusalem is καταπέτασμα, literally “that which is spread out downwards, that which hangs down.’”’ That this word should be found in Thayer’s ‘ Biblical” list is not in itself surprising, for the idea before us is a technical one, connected with the apparatus of worship. The occurrence of the word in the Epistle of Aristeas, in Philo and Josephus, would not affect the case, for these writers knew the word from the Septuagint. Nevertheless it cannot be that we have here to do with a Biblical or Judaeo-Christian ‘ speciality, created by the Septuagint. An inscription from Samos, 346-5 B.c.,> cataloguing the furniture of the temple of Hera,
1 Page 570. .
2 Inscriptiones Antiquae Ovae Septentrionalis Ponti Euxini Graecae et Latinae ed. Basilius Latyschev, II., Petropoli, 1890, No. 5215-15, χωρὶς ts τί ἢ]ν προ[σ]ευχὴν θωπείας τε καὶ προσκα[ρτερ]ήσεως, ‘ besides reverence and constancy towards the place of prayer’ (9wzeia, which generally means “' flattery,” is here used in the good sense of ‘‘ reverence’). Schiirer, Geschichte des jiidischen Volkes, 111.8 Ὁ. 53, points to the analogy between this inscription and the striking usage in the New Testament of combining the verb προσκαρτερέω regularly with προσευχή (meaning ‘‘ prayer ’’: it could hardly be ‘‘ place of prayer ’”’). With regard to this verb cf. P. M. Meyer on Pap. Hamb. I. (1911) No. 4, p. 16 f.
\3 Op. cit. No. 53, with the same formula as in No. 52, which we may there- fore take to have been a standing expression.
4 That is the opinion of Kennedy, Sources, p. 113.
5 In Otto Hoffmann, Die Griechischen Dialehte, 111., Géttingen, 1898, p. 72
(from Ath. Mitt. 7, p. 367ff.; cf. van Herwerden, Lexicon, pp. 433, 717); καταπέτασμα τῆς τραπέζης, ‘‘ table-cover.”
Tic. 11.—Stele with Decree of Honour from Syme, 2nd cent. B.c. Now in the chapel of St. Michael Tharrinos, Syme. By permission of the Austrian Archaeological Institute.
LANGUAGE OF THE. NEW TESTAMENT το3
furnishes an example which is a century earlier, and par- ticularly valuable because it shows the word employed in a religious context and incidentally corrects the description © Alexandrian ”’ 1 with which the lexicons had mechanically labelled it.
(32) ἐπισυναγω γή, found only in 2 Macc. ii. 7, 2 Thess. ii. 1, and Heb. x. 25, where it denotes various senses of the word “assembly,’”’ is according to Cremer 2 “‘ unknown in profane Greek.” As συναγωγή itself was originally a profane word, one is inclined to ask why ἐπισυναγωγή should be different, especially as the profane συναγωγή became among the Jews (and occasionally among the Christians) the technical expres- sion for the (assembled) congregation and the house in which they met. As a matter of fact a mere statistical accident was the cause of error here, and a second accident has very happily corrected the first. In the island of Syme, off the coast of Caria, there has been discovered, built into the altar of the chapel of St. Michael Tharrinos, the upper portion of a stele inscribed with a decree in honour of a deserving citizen.® The writing is considered to be not later than 100 B.C., so that the inscription is probably older than the Second Book of Maccabees. By the kind permission of the Austrian Archaeological Institute I am able to reproduce here (Figure 11) a facsimile of the whole stele (including the lower portion, which was discovered earlier).
On the upper fragment of this stele we find our word in the general meaning of ‘“‘collection’’*; the difference between it and the common συναγωγή is scarcely greater than between, say, the English ‘‘collecting’’ and “ collecting together ’’5: the longer Greek word was probably more to the taste of the later period.
1 Even Thayer says, s.v. καταπέτασμα, that it is an Alexandrian Greek word, for which ‘' other ’’ Greeks used παραπέτασμα. But in the identical inventory mentioned above, containing the καταπέτασμα τῆς τραπέζης, we find παραπε- rdopara noted immediately afterwards. The two words therefore do not coincide. 2 *Page 79.
3 Jahreshefte des Osterreichischen Archdologischen Institutes in Wien, 7 (1904) p. 81 ff. (with facsimile, p. 84) = Inscriptiones Graecae, XII. 3 Suppl. No*1270.
4 Lines 11 and 12: τᾶς δὲ émovvayw/yas τοῦ διαφόρου γινομένας πολυχρονίου, “ the collection, however, of the (sum to defray) expenses proving a matter of long time ” (the translation was sent me by the editor, Hiller von Gaertringen, in a letter, Berlin, 18 July, 1905).
5 [In German Sammlung and Ansammlung. Tr.]
104 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
The stone which has established the secular character of this Bible word—-the heathen stone of Syme built into the altar of the Christian chapel of St. Michael—may be taken as symbolical. It will remind us that in the vocabulary of our sacred Book there is embedded material derived from the language of the surrounding world.
Even without the stone we could have learnt the. special lesson, for the Thesaurus Graecae Linguae had already registered the word in the geographer Ptolemy and in the title of the third book of Artemidorus, the interpreter of dreams, both of the 2nd century A.D., and later in Proclus. Such “ post-Christian ’ ‘‘ late’ passages, however, generally fail to impress the followers of Cremer’s method, and there- fore the pre-Christian, and (if importance be attached to the book) pre-Maccabean inscription is very welcome.
In the above examples it has often happened that the secularisation of a ‘ Biblical” word has been effected by more than one solitary quotation, e.g. from a papyrus; again and again we have seen such words occurring outside the Bible in secular uses both in Egypt and also in Asia Minor.? This uniformity (or we might say, these real Κοινή character- istics) in the vocabulary of the Kowyj—an observation of some importance to our total estimate of international Greek—may now in conclusion receive further illustration from certain new discoveries relating to the curious word Novela (Aoyia),? ‘a (charitable) collection,” which I have already dealt with elsewhere.?
This word, occurring “‘ only ” in I Cor. xvi. I, 2, has been given a false etymology * and has sometimes even been regarded as an invention of St. Paul’s.5 The etymology,
1 Another typical example is σιτομέτριον, used in Luke xii. 42 for ‘a portion of corn.’ In Bibelstudien, p. 156 [Bible Studies, p. 158], I was only able to quote it from Egypt (cf. also Mayser, Grammatik dey griechischen Papyri, p. 431). We now find it in an Opramoas inscription of 149 A.D. at Rhodiapolis in Lycia, with the spelling σειτομέτριον (Heberdey, Opramoas, p. 50, xix Ag); its exact meaning here is not clear to me.
2 This second spelling has also been found now in the new texts, e.g. in fhe Thebes ostracon given on Ὁ. 105 below.
3 Bibelstudien, p. 139 ff.; Neue Bibelstudien, p. 46 £. [Bible Studies, pp. 142, 219]. Cf. also Moulton and Milligan, Vocabulary, p. 377.
ὁ From λέγω.
5 Cf, Bibelstudien, p. 139 [Bible Studies, p. 142].
Fic. 12.—-Ostracon, Thebes, 4 August, 63 Α.Ὁ. Receipt for Isis Collection. Now in the Berlin Museum. By permission of the Directors of the State Museums.
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 105
however, is now definitely ascertained: it comes from λογεύω, “ I collect,’”’ a verb which, like the derivate, was found for the first time comparatively recently in papyri, ostraca, and inscriptions! from Egypt and elsewhere. We find it used chiefly of religious? collections for a god, a temple, etc., just as St. Paul uses it of his collection of money for the “saints ’’’ at Jerusalem. Out of the large number of new examples from Egypt‘ I select an ostracon which comes very near in date to the First Epistle to the Corinthians. It was written on 4 August, 63 A.D., discovered at Thebes in Egypt,® and-is now in the Berlin Museum.® For the photo- graph (Figure 12) I am indebted to the kind offices of Wilhelm Schubart. The little document 7 runs as follows :—
Wevapodvis Πεκύσιος Psenamunis, the son of Pecysis,
a phennésis,}* to the homologos 14 φεννήσιος"ο ὁμο ὃ Πιβούχι Pibuchis, the son of Pateésis, Πατεήσιος χε, ἀπέχω πα- greeting. I have received from
λ . , 108 32,11 ΩΣ j thee 4 drachmae 1 obol, bein pe σοῦ 5:20 Shon τὴν λογίαν the soils of Isis on behalf of the public works. In the year nine of Nero the lord,15 Mesore 11th.
Ἴσιδος περὶ τῶν δημοσίων ι. 12 ἐνάτου Νέρωνος τοῦ κυρίου Μεσορὴ τᾶ.
1 Cf. A, Wilhelm, Athenische Mitteilungen, 23 (1898) p. 416 f.; Wilcken, Griechische Ostraka, I. p. 255, etc.
? As shown especially by the ostraca, Wilcken, Griechische Ostvaka, 1. Pp. 253 fi. :
3 A most grotesque theory was put forward as late as 1897 by Linke in the Festschrift fiir Professor D. Fricke (cf. Theol. Literaturblatt, 19 [1898] col. 121). Hesuggests that the “ great logia”’ in the field of St. Paul’s missionary labours was not a collection of money but a determination of the forms of doctrine and liturgical formulations that had arisen within the churches through special gifts of the Spirit. St. Paul, he thinks, wishes to obtain the results of the thought and prayer, revelations and spiritual hymns of each single church in the course of an ecclesiastical year. The parallel to the modern German system of church returns is so close that one wonders almost at the omission of statistics of mixed marriages !
* Cf. especially Wilcken, Griechische Ostvaka, I. p.. 253 ff.; J. H. Moulton, The Expositor, February 1903, p. 116, December 1903, p. 434; Mayser, Grammatik dev griechischen Papyri, Ὁ. 417.
5 Wilcken, Griechische Ostraka, II. No. 413. ® No. 4317.
7 For explanation of the contents cf. the commentary in Wilcken, Griechische Ostraka, 11. p. 253 ff., and Archiv, 4, p. 267.
8 2,6. ὁμο(λόγῳ). 9. t.e. χ(αίρειν). 10 {,6. δραχμάς.
11 fe, ὀβολ(όν). 12 Te. ἔτους.
[For notes 13 to 15 see next page.
τοῦ LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Beyond the numerous instances of the use of the word in Egypt, the only witness for the word in Asia Minor was St. Paul. Inscriptions now forthcoming from Asia Minor are therefore a very welcome addition to the statistics. A marble tablet of about the first century A.D., found at Smyrna,} enumerates among the votive gifts presented by a benefactor of the god and the city “a gilded and . . . key for the collec- tion and procession of the gods.’ In this instance, not far removed in date from the First Epistle to the Corinthians, the word is used in a sacred connexion, but the oldest example from Asia Minor hitherto known no doubt refers to secular matters.2, A limestone slab, found at Magnesia on the Maeander, and now at Berlin, is inscribed with the award of the people of Magnesia in a dispute between Hierapytna and Itanus in the year 138 or 132 B.c.3 By the kind permission of the Museum authorities at Berlin I am enabled to give here a reduced reproduction of Kern’s facsimile‘ (Figure 13).
1 Dittenberger, Sylloge,2 No. 58326, ΝΟ. 99626, κλεῖν κεχρυσωμένην καὶ. ἐμπεφιασμένην (the meaning of this word is doubtful) πρὸς τὴν λογήαν (sic) καὶ πομπὴν τῶν θεῶν. The reference seems to be to a procession on the occasion of which money contributions were expected from the spectators.
2 The sentence is mutilated. G. Thieme, Die Inschriften von Magnesia am Mdaander und das Neue Testament, p. 17, who noted the inscription and fully appreciated its importance as a proof of the unity of the Koj, thinks it refers to the collecting together of supplies of corn for warlike purposes.—Cf. more- over the inscriptions of Priene 1953, (¢c. 200 B.c.) and 82,4 (6. 200 B.c.), where the editors conjecture the word.
3 Die Inschvriften von Magnesia am Mdander, edited by Otto Kern, No. 1057, = Dittenberger, Sylloge,? No. 929,99, ὃ No. 685199, λογείαις τε σιτικαῖς, “ collections of corn.”
4 Plate VI. No. 105.
Continuation of notes to p. 105 :--
13 Hellenised Egyptian title, ‘‘ priest of Isis.”’
14 Homologos is a technical term for a country labourer working under a contract. (Cf. the labourers in the vineyard, Matt. xx. and 1 Cor. ix. 7.] The same man contributed in the same year and on the same day to another collection called λογεία τοῦ θεοῦ, “ collection of the god,’’ Wilcken, Griechische Ostraka, 11. No. 414; the sum was 4 drachmae 2 obols. Other receipts for contributions by the same man in other years are extant (ostraca Nos. 402, 412, 415, 416, 417, 418, 420). As arule they are for 4 drachmae and a few obols. They are interesting evidence of the extent of the financial claims made upon persons of no great means for religious purposes in the period which saw the rise of Christianity. Cf.on the subject Walter Otto, Priester und Tempel im hellenistischen Agypten I. (Leipzig, 1905), p. 359. ff.
15 On this expression cf. Chapter IV. below, p. 349 ff.
Fic. 13,—Limestone Slab, Magnesia on the Maeander, 138 or 132 B.c. Judicial Award by the Magnesians, lines 52-80. Now in the Berlin Museum. By permission of the Directors of the State Museums.
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT τοῦ
Taken together with the poor Egyptian potsherd given as a receipt to the country labourer Pibuchis, this official inscrip- tion from Magnesia (a duplicate of which has been found in Crete 1) shows, like the inscription from Smyrna, that the remarkable word used by St. Paul in corresponding with the Corinthian Christians was common to all grades of the inter- national language.
A considerable number ? of ‘‘ Biblical’ words having thus been brought into proper historical alignment, it is scarcely necessary to enter into proofs that many words in the New Testament hitherto described as ‘‘rare’’ are authenticated by the new texts. The harvest here ‘is of course equally great in proportion, and obtained with less trouble than in the first group.
(b) As regards the meanings of words our knowledge has also been largely increased. I have already remarked (p. 78 above) that the influence of Primitive Christianity was far more powerful to transform words, 1.6. to create new mean- ings, than to create new words. But here again there has often been great exaggeration in the statement of the facts. Cremer especially had a tendency to increase as much as possible the number of specifically “ Biblical ” or “‘ New Testament ’’ meanings of words common to all Greek; and in exegetical literature, when dogmatic positions of the schools are to be defended, a favourite device is to assume “‘ Biblical ”’ or “New Testament ’’ meanings. The texts that are now forthcoming from the world contemporary with the New Testament serve, however, to generalise not a few of these specialities, e.g. the use of ἀδελφός (‘‘ brother ᾽᾽) for the mem- bers of a community, ἀναστρέφομαι (“1 live’’) and ἀναστροφή (“manner of life”; ‘conversation,’ A.V.) in an ethical sense,! ἀντίλημψις (“ help ’’), λειτουργέω (“I act in the public service ’’) and λειτουργία (“ public service ’’) in a sacral sense,
1 But unfortunately mutilated, with loss of the λογεία passage.
2 Cf. also πάροδος, p. 295, 0. 3 below. 3 Numerous references in my Bibelstudien and Neue Bibelstudien (= Bubie
Studies) and in the works of J. H. Moulton and Thieme, ‘ Cf. Chapter IV. below, p. 311 f.
108 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
ἐπιθυμητής (“ desiring”’) ina bad sense, λούω (“1 wash’) in a sacral sense, πάροικος ( sojourner ’’), etc., etc.1
But there are other ways in which not unfrequently the familiar words of the New Testament acquire a new light. A new choice of meanings presents itself, changing, it may be, the inner meaning of the sacred text more or less decidedly, disclosing the manifold interpretations of the gospel that were possible to the men of old, illuminating in both directions, backward and forward, the history of the meaning of words.
Let us look at a few examples.
(1) When Jesus sent forth His apostles for the first time He said to them ? (Matt. x. 8 ff.) :-—
“ Freely ye received, freely give. Get you no gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses (margin: girdles) : no wallet for your journey .. .” (R.V.).
Or, as it is reported by St. Mark (vi. 8) :—
“ He charged them that they should take nothing for their journey, save a staff only; no bread, no wallet, no money. (margin: brass) in their purse (margin. girdle)’ (R.V.).
And thus in St. Luke (ix. 3; cf. x. 4 and xxii. 35 1.) :—
“ Take nothing for your journey, neither staff, nor wallet, nor bread, nor money. . . .”’ (R.V.).
One of the characteristic utterances of Jesus has here been handed down, not without variations, but still in such form that the original can be discerned beneath them: the apostles were told to take with them for their journey only the barest necessaries? among which was to be reckoned neither money nor bread. According to St. Matthew they were further forbidden even to earn money on their way, as they might have doné by working miracles of healing, etc. The meaning of the “ wallet” (A.V. “ scrip”) has seldom been questioned, because it seems so obvious: most com- mentators probably think of it as a travelling-bag,? or, more
1 References in Bibelstudien and Neue Bibelstudien (= Bible Studies).
2 Cf. Die Christliche Welt, 17 (1903) col. 242 f.; and Alphons Steinmann, Die Welt des Paulus im Zeichen des Verkehvs, Braunsberg, 1915, p. 64 ff. His remarks on the equipment of the apostles in general are particularly worthy of attention.
3 The one point on which the authorities leave us in doubt is whether the staff was one of them.
4 In that case construing “ wallet ” with “ for your journey.”
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 109
precisely defined, as a bread-bag. The word in the original Greek, πήρα, is capable of either meaning, according to circumstances. In the context “ travelling-bag ’’ would do very well; “ bread-bag ” not so well, being superfluous after the mention of “ bread,” and tautology seems out of place in these brief, pointed commands given by Jesus. But there is a special meaning, suggested by one of the monuments, which suits the context at least as well as the more general sense of “bag” or “ travelling-bag.”” The monument in question was erected in the Roman Imperial period at Kefr- Hauar in Syria by a person who calls himself, in the Greek inscription, a “‘ slave’ of the Syrian goddess. ‘“‘ Sent by the lady,” as he says himself, this heathen apostle tells of the journeys on which he went begging for the “lady” and boasts triumphantly that ‘‘ each journey brought in seventy bags.”’ 1 The word here employed is πήρα. Of course it has nothing to do with well-filled provision-bags for the journey : it clearly means the beggar’s collecting-bag.2 The same special meaning makes excellent sense in our text, particu- larly in St. Matthew’s version: there is to be ng earning, and also no begging of money. With this possible explanation of the word πήρα the divine simplicity of Jesus/stands out afresh against the background suggested by the heathen inscription. While Christianity was still young the beggar- priest was making his rounds in the land of Syria on behalf of the national goddess. The caravan conveying the pious robber’s booty to the shrine lengthens as he passes from village
1 Published by Ch. Fossey, Bulletin de Correspondance Hellénique, 21 (1897) Pp. 60, ἀ(π)οφόρησε ἑκάστη ἀγωγὴ πήρας o’—Eberhard Nestle (postcard, Maul- bronn, 13 March, 1903) called my attention to the punning observation in the Didascalia=Const. Apost. 3, 6, about the itinerant widows, who were so ready to receive that they were not so much χῆραι as πῆραι (which we may ' perhaps imitate in English by saying that though spouse-less they were by no means pouch-less). , The late Hermann Diels, + June 1922, wrote to me from Berlin W., 22 July, 1908: “‘ Does not the beggar’s bag form part of the equipment of the mendicant friar of antiquity, 1.6. the Cynic? Crates the Cynic wrote a poem called Πήρα (fragm. in my Poetae philosophi, fr. 4, Ὁ. 218)."" 2 [Wallet, then, is just the right word in English. Cf. Shakespeare, Troilus and Cressida, III. iii. 145, “ Time hath, my lord, a wallet at his back, Wherein he puts alms for oblivion.” A ‘writer in Notes and Queries, 7th Ser., iv. 78, points out that the triangular piece of stuff, like a bag, which hangs from behind the left shoulder of a junior barrister’s gown was originally a wallet to receive fees.—There is an illustration of the ancient wallet in Anthony Rich’s Dict. of Roman and Greek Antiquities, s.v.‘‘ Pera.’ ΤᾺ]
ΤΙῸ LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
to village, and assuredly the lady will not forget her slave. In the same age and country One who had not where to lay His head sent forth His apostles, saying :—
“ Freely ye received, freely give. Get you no gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses: no wallet for your journey.”
(2) Among the sayings of our Lord we find thrice repeated the phrase ‘“‘ They have their reward,” 6.5. in Matt. vi.-2 of the hypocrites who sound a trumpet before them when they do their alms. The Greek word translated “ have’ (A.V.), or preferably (with the Revisers) “ have received,” is ἀπέχω, “‘T have or receive in full,” “1 have got.’”’ Reward is spoken of in the passage immediately preceding, but there the simple verb éyw is used. I long ago suggested? that the word ἀπέχω is explainable by the papyri and ostraca. In countless instances we find the word in these texts ? in a meaning that suits admirably our Lord’s saying about rewards, viz. “I have received ’’; it is, that is to say, a technical expression regularly employed in drawing up a receipt. Compare, for instance, two ostraca from Thebes figured in this book, one (p. 166 below) a receipt for rent in the Ptolemaic period, the other (p. 105 above) a receipt for the Isis collection, 4 August, 63 A.D. Still nearer in date to the gospel passage is an ostracon of very vulgar type in my collection,® a receipt for alien tax paid at Thebes, 32-33 A.D., of which I here give a full-sized reproduction (Figure 14).
1 Neue Bibelstudien, p. 56; Bible Studies, p. 229. Cf. also Moulton and Milligan, The Expositor, July 1908, p. 91.
2 The importance of this seeming trifle, both intrinsically and from the point of view of historical grammar, has already received due recognition from Heinrich Erman, who discussed the subject in an article on ‘‘ Die ‘ Habe ’- Quittung bei den Griechen,” Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung, 1, p. 77 ff. His objections to the translation ‘‘ I have received ” are waived by A. Thumb, Prinzipienfragen der Koine-Forschung, Neuve Jahrbiicher fiir das klassische Altertum, 1906, p. 255: ‘‘ ἀπέχουσι is, by reason of the nature of the action expressed, identical with ἔλαβον or ἔσχον, 1.6. it is an aorist-present.” Cf. also J. H. Moulton, Grammar,’ p. 247, and Moulton and Milligan, Vocabulary, Ρ. 571. Further references in Mayser, Grammatik der griech. Papyri, Ὁ. 487; Wilcken, Griechische Ostraka, I. p. 86; and Paul M. Meyer, Griech. Texte aus Agypten, p. 115.
3 No. 31. We possess another, somewhat later, ostracon by the same writer Pamaris, No. 32 in my collection (Paul M. Meyer, p. 148 f.); the same vulgar- isms and mistakes are noticeable there as in No, 31.
Fic. 14.—Ostracon, Thebes, 32-33 A.D. Receipt for Alien Tax. Now in the Author’s collectic |
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT © 111
I now give the text according to the edition of my ostraca by Paul M. Meyer 3 :—
Tlapapis 'Ἑρμοδώρου Pamaris the son of Hermodorus ᾿Αβῶς. ἀπέχων" 5 παρὰ σοῦ to Abos. I have receiving (sic) τόλες"ο 8 ἐπιξένου Θώυθ from thee alien tax 5 (for the καὶ Φαῶφι $2 B. L414 months) Thoyth and Phaophi TiBepiov Καίσαρος 2 drachmae. In the year 19 of Σεβαστός. Tiberius Caesar Augustus. Σ(εσ)η(μείωμαιμ). T have noted.
This technical ἀπέχω, however, was in use not only in Egypt but elsewhere in the Hellenistic world, as shown by inscriptions at Delphi recording manumissions at the begin- ning ὁ and end of the second century B.c., and again in the first century A.D.” An inscription from Orchomenus of the third or fourth century Β.0.8 shows the expression in use even then in the Aeolic dialect; it is close in date to the oldest papyrus reference I know of, viz. Hibeh Papyri No. 97; (279-278 or 282-281 B.C.).
I think we may say, therefore, that this technical meaning of ἀπέχω, which must have been known to every Greek- speaking person, down to the meanest labourer, applies well to the stern text about the hypocrites: ‘‘ they have received their reward in full,” 7.e. it is as though they had already given a receipt, and they have absolutely no further claim to reward. This added touch of quiet irony makes the text more life-like and pointed. From the same technical use J. de Zwaan ®
1 Griechische Texte aus Agypten, Berlin, 1916, Part 2: Ostraca in the Deissmann Collection, No. 31, p. 148. !
2 = τέλος, “ toll, custom,’’ as in Matt. xvii. 25, Rom. xiii. 7.
3 2,6. δραχμάς. 4 7,6. ἔτους.
5 On this alien tax cf. Wilcken, Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung, 1, p. 153 (where other quotations for the word ἐπίξενος, ‘‘stranger,’’ are given besides Clement of Alexandria, I. 977 A, which is the only example in E. A. Sophocles’ Lexicon) and Paul M. Meyer’s commentary, p.147 f. At present this ostracon seems to be the earliest evidence of the tax.
® Dittenberger, Sylloge,? No. 845,, τὰν τιμὰν ἀπέχει, ‘the price he hath received.” Cf. p. 323 below.
7 Bulletin de Correspondance Hellénique, 22 (1898), e.g. Ὁ. 58, καὶ τὰν τειμὰν ἀπέχω πᾶσαν, “and I have received’ the whole price”; first century A.D., ¢.8. pp. 116, 120.
8 The Collection of Ancient Greek Inscriptions in the British Museum, Part II. No. 1584, ἀπέχι πάντα, ‘‘ he hath received all things.”
9 The Text and Exegesis of Mark xiv. 41, and the Papyri, The Expositor, December 1905, p. 459 ff. He takes the betrayer, who is mentioned imme- diately in the next verse. to be the suhiect
112 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
has attempted to explain the enigmatical ἀπέχει in Mark xiv. 41, and it is not improbable that St. Paul is alluding to it in a gently humorous way in Phil. iv. 18.1
(3) The first scattered congregations of Greek-speaking Christians up and down the Roman Empire spoke of them- selves as a ‘‘ (convened) assembly’; at first each single congregation was so called, and afterwards the whole body of Christians everywhere was spoken of collectively as “ the (convened) assembly.’”” That is. the most literal translation of the Greek word ἐκκλησία." This self-bestowed name rested on the certain conviction that God had separated from the world His “ saints’’ in Christ, and had “ called”’ or “ con- vened ”’ them to an assembly, which was ‘‘ God’s assembly,” ‘* God’s muster,” because God was the convener.®
It is one of the characteristic but little-considered facts in the history of the early Christian missions that the Latin- speaking people of the West, to whom Christianity came, did not translate the Greek word ἐκκλησία (as they did many other technical terms) but simply borrowed it. Why was this? There was no lack of words for “ assembly ” in Latin, and as a matter of fact contio or comitia was often translated by ἐκκλησία. There must have been some special reason for borrowing the Greek word, and it lay doubtless in the subtle feeling that Latin possessed no word exactly equivalent to the Greek ἐκκλησία. There is evidence of this feeling even in non-Christian usage. Pliny the Younger employs the Latin- ised word ecclesia in one of his letters to Trajan.5 Some years ago a bilingual inscription of the year 103-4 Α.}.6 came to
1 Asa matter of fact, ἀπέχω is frequently combined with πάντα in receipts; cf. the Orchomenus inscription quoted in the last note but one.
2 For what follows cf. Die Christliche Welt, 18 (1904) col. 200 f.
3 I pointed out in Die Christliche Welt, 13 (1899) col. 701, that an excellent analogy to the Primitive Christian use of ἐκκλησία is afforded by the members of so-called “ Pietistic ’’ congregations in the valley of the Dill (a tributary of the Lahn, a little below Giessen) in their use of the word ‘‘ Versammlung ”’ for “congregation.” ([Cf. the English “ meeting ’’ and ‘‘ meeting-house " as used by Quakers, Methodists, and other Nonconformists. TRr.]
4 David Magie, De Romanorum iuris publict sacrique vocabulis sollemnibus in Graecum sermonem conversis, Lipsiae, 1905, p. 17 etc. (see the index).
5 Epist. x. 111, ‘‘ bule et ecclesia consentiente.’’ βουλή has also been adopted. With regard to the antécedents of “ Biblical’’ Latinity cf. also Appendix VII, p. 447 ff. ᾿
® Jahreshefte des Osterreichischen Archdologischen Institutes, 2 (1899), Supplement p. 43 f.; now with facsimile in Forschungen in Ephesos, Vol. 2,
p. 147 ff. Cf. p. 13, 0. I.
ῃ
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 113
light at Ephesus, which furnishes a still more interesting example. It was found in the theatre, the building so familiar to readers of Acts xix., one of the best preserved ruins in the ancient city. A distinguished Roman official, C. Vibius Salutaris, had presented a silver image of Diana (we are reminded at once of the silver shrines of Diana made by Demetrius, Acts xix. 24) and other statues “that they might be set up in every ἐκκλησία in the theatre upon the pedestals.” 1 The parallel Latin text has, ita ut [om]n[# e]ccle- sia supra bases ponerentur. The Greek word was therefore simply transcribed. Here we have a truly classical example (classical in its age and in its origin) of the instinctive feeling of Latin speakers of the West which afterwards showed itself among the Western Christians : ἐκκλησία cannot be translated, it must be taken over.
The word which thus penetrated into the West is one of the indelible marks of the origin of Christianity. Just as the words amen, abba, etc. are the Semitic birthmarks, so the word ecclesia (and many others besides) points for all time to the fact that the beginnings of Christianity must be sought also in the Greek East.
(4) For the word ἁμαρτωλός, “ sinning, sinful,’ Cremer ? quotes but one passage from Aristotle and one from Plutarch : “ besides these passages only, it seems, in Biblical and ecclesi- - astical Greek.’’ In the Appendix,? however, comes this very necessary correction: ‘‘ The word is found not only in the two passages quoted but also in inscriptions, and so often that it must be described as quite a usual word, at least in Syria, to designate a sinner in the religious sense.’”’ There is only one more correction to make: here, and in the epi- graphical references which Cremer proceeds to give, we must read not ‘Syria ’”’ but ‘‘ Lycia.”’ 4
The subject had already been treated in detail by G. Hirschfeld,> and more recently L. Deubner® published a
1 ta τίθηνται κατ᾽ ἐκκλησίαν (for this formula cf. Acts xiv. 23). ἐν τῶ (sic) θεάτρω (sic) ἐπὶ τῶν βάσεων. This is also a confirmation of Acts xix. 32, 41, according to which the ἐκκλησίαι at Ephesus took place in the theatre.
2 Page 151. 3 °Page 1110. ;
4 Cremer probably misread the handwriting of Schlatter, to whom he no doubt was indebted for this important correction.
5 K6nigsberger Studien, 1 (1887) p. 83 ff.
5 Athenische Mitteilungen, 27 (1902) p. 262; cf. also G. Mendel, Bulletin de
Corresnandanea Hallénianna a. fennat = ---
[14 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
collection of passages from inscriptions, which is almost identical with Cremer’s. The inscriptions are of a class very common in the south-west of Asia Minor—epitaphs con- taining a threat- against anyone who shall desecrate the tomb, ἁμαρτωλὸς ἔστω θεοῖς (κατα)χθονίοις, “ let him be as a sinner before the (sub)terranean gods.” In the same district, however, we find the words ἐπάρατος, “ cursed,’’? and ἔνοχος, “guilty,” employed in exactly the same way: [ἔνοχος ἔστω πᾶσι θεοῖς, “let him be guilty before all the gods,”’? This parallelism between ἁμαρτωλός and ἔνοχος seems to me to afford a solution of a grammatical puzzle which has cues caused me difficulties, viz. the use ‘of the genitive after ἔνοχος,3 especially in the important passage I Cor. xi. 27, to which I have long sought a parallel in inscriptions and papyri, but in vain, despite the frequent occurrence of the word. We find, however, the parallel ἁμαρτωλός with the genitive of the authority offended in an inscription from Telmessus in Lycia, 240 B.C., 4 and in a similar pre-Christian inscription from Myra in Lycia.5 We also find the synonyms ἄδικος,
”
“unjust,” and ἀσεβής, “ impious,’’ in inscriptions from the Delphinium at Miletus both before and after the Christian era.6 Thus we have sufficient parallels to account for the
1 Reisen im stidwestlichen Kleinasien [cf. p. 17, n. 1, above], II. p. 159, No. 187.
2 Ibid. p. 166, No. 193.
3 Ὁ, Wilcken has also been struck by the New Testament genitive in Matt. xxvi. 66, Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung, 1, p. 170, although this genitive of the punishment is surely not without parallel. Nachmanson, Eranos II (1912) p. 232, sees no difficulty in the genitive. The peculiar thing to me is, however, not the genitive as such, of which there are frequent instances in the form of genitive of the crime or genitive of the punishment, but that we should have a genitive of the authority offended. J. Wellhausen, Ein- leitung in die dvei ersten Evangelien, p. 34, says that ἔνοχον εἶναι τῇ κρίσει, Matt. v. 21 f., is not Greek—why, I do not know.
“ Dittenberger, Ovientis Graect Inscriptiones Selectae, No. 553. (= Michel, Recueil, No. 547312.), ἁμαρτωλοὶ ἔστωσαν [θεῶ]ν πάντων, ‘let them be as sinners before all the gods.”
5 Reisen im stidwestlichen Kleinasien, ΤΙ. p. 36, No. 58, ἁμαρτωλὸς ἔστω θεῶν πάντων, “ let him be as a sinner before all the gods.”
§ Milet, Ergebnisse, Heft 3, Inschriften, No. 1494, (182 B.C. ?) ἀδίκους τε εἶναι αὐτοὺς τῶν θεῶν ods ὁμωμόκασιν ; No. 150195 (180 B.C. ?) ἄδικοί re ἔστωσαν τῶν θεῶν ots @pocav; No. 134255. (Ist cent. A.D.) τὸν δὲ ψηφισάμενον ἄρχοντα ἀσεβῆ καὶ ἄδικον ὑπάρχειν τῶν προγεγραμμένων θεῶν. The sense is exactly parallel to that of the aforementioned Lycian texts.
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT [115
peculiar use of the synonymous évoyos by St. Paul the Cilician 1 in the First Epistle to the Corinthians.
(5) The Hebrew name for the Feast of Tabernacles is hag hassukkoth, ‘‘ feast of booths.” To have been quite literal, the Greek translators of the Old Testament must have rendered this ἑορτὴ (τῶν) σκηνῶν, as is actually found in the Septuagint, Lev. xxiii. 34, Deut. xvi. 13, 2 Chron. viii. 13, Ezra iii. 4, 2 Macc.-x. 6. In the majority of passages, how- ever, in which the feast is mentioned (Deut. xvi. τό, Xxxi. IO, Zech. xiv. 16, 18, 19, I Esdras v. 51, I Macc. x. 21, 2 Macc. i. 9, 18) we find the more cumbrous expression ἑορτὴ (τῆς) σκηνοπηγίας, “feast of booth-making,” which has found its way into the Greek used by Jews of the Diaspora,? the New ‘Testament (John vii. 2), and Josephus, and was therefore no doubt the most usual.3 The reason for the choice of this cumbrous expression is not discoverable in the Hebrew. It lies rather in the fact that the verb σκηνοπηγεῖσθαι already bore. a technical religious sense in the world which spoke the language of the Septuagint. There is a long inscription 4 from the island of Cos, probably of the 2nd century B.c., which records the arrangements for sacrifices and enumerates the acts of religion to which the worshippers were obliged. They had to offer sacrifice and they had to “ erect a booth ” (cxavorayetcOwv),® on the occasion of a great panegyry or solemn assembly, ‘‘ which was probably held only once a year.’ ® It is well known that Plutarch regarded the Jewish
1 Possibly it was a provincialismvof S.W. Asia Minor. For earlier treatment of the supposed “‘ Cilicisms ” in the New Testament, see Winer and Schmiedel, 8.3, 26 (p. 23). But I prefer to assume that the usage, obviously a religious one, occurring in certain formulae, was fairly widely spread, and that St. Paul knew it as such. i
2 Cf. the long Jewish inscription from Berenice in Cyrenaica (13 B.c.), in Schirer, Geschichte des jiidischen Volkes, III.4p. 79. (Eng. trs., Div. II., vol. 2, p. 246.]
3 Winer and Schmiedel, § 3, 2 6 (p. 23), reckon oxyvornyia among the words that were certainly coined by the Greek Jews. But it is found in Aristotle. |
4 Athenische Mitteilungen, 16 (1891) p. 406 ff.
5 This formula is many times repeated.
6 According to the editor, Johannes Toepffer, p. 415, who refers to the Jewish Feast of Tabernacles and gives a number of pagan examples of the custom of erecting booths for religious festivals. Theodor Wiegand writes (postcard, Miletus, 22 May, 1908): “‘ We have found in the market-place of Priene, near the altar in the middle of the square, stones marked with letters and perforated to receive wooden supports. They are evidently relics of
116 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Feast of Tabernacles as a festival of Dionysus+; the Sep- tuagint translators, with other motives, did much the same thing : by choosing a secular name for their feast they brought it more into touch with the religious usages of the world around them. This is one more factor in the great adaptive process for which the Septuagint Bible stands in general in the history of religion.”
(c) Standing phrases and fixed formulae have often found their way from the contemporary language into the New Testament.® ;
(1) The phrase δέδωμι ἐργασίαν, “I give diligence, take pains’ (Luke xii. 58), explained in all the grammars as a Latinism,4 and not known elsewhere except in Hermogenes ὅ (2nd century A.D.), is nevertheless.found in an inscription recording a decree of the Senate concerning the affairs of Stratonicia in Caria (81 B.c.).6 It is possible, of course, to maintain that the phrase is here imitated from the Latin original,’ but a letter of vulgar type among the Oxyrhynchus Papyri, dated 2 B.c., has it in the imperative 8 just as in St. Luke, and shows it (also as St. Luke does) in living use among the people, who no longer felt that it was a “ Latinism.” I am informed by Wilcken that the phrase occurs again in a letter, civca 118 A.D., among the Bremen Papyri (No. 18).
(2) In the same context in St. Luke (xii. 57) we have the
the custom of erecting tents at festivals.” L. Martens (letter, Duisburg, 18 May, 1910) refers to Thucydides i. 133, where a suppliant erects a tent in the sacred precinct.-
1 Sympos. iv. 6, 2.
2 Cf, the appendix (I). at the end of this book on the Jewish prayers for vengeance found at Rheneia, and my little work Die Hellenisiervung des semtti- schen Monotheismus, Leipzig, 1903, reprinted from the Neue Jahtbiicher fiir das klassische Altertum, 1903.
3. Numerous examples have already been given in my Bible Studies and in Moulton and Thieme.
4 = operam do.
5 De invent. iii. 5, 7.
τ Dittenberger, Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae, No. 44119, φροντίζωσιν
᾿διδῶσίν τε ἐργασίαν, ‘‘may they take heed and give diligence.” Ditten- berger (p. 23) criticises this phrase severely.
7 So Paulus Viereck, Sermo Gvraecus quo senatus populusque Romanus magistratusque populi Romani usque ad Tiberii Caesaris aetatem in scriptis publicis usi sunt, Gottingae, 1888, p. 83.
8 The Oxyrhynchus Papyri No. 742n,., δὸς ἐργασίαν, “‘ give diligence.”
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 117
expression κρίνω τὸ δίκαιον, literally “1 judge the right,” which used to be regarded as unique, and which Bernhard Weiss! explains to mean deciding about that which God demands from us. It is made clearer, however, by a prayer for vengeance addressed to Demeter which was found inscribed on a tablet of lead at Amorgus.? There the goddess is implored to give right judgment. So Jesus advises those who would go to law with one another not to wait for the judge to speak but to become reconciled beforehand and thus put an end to the dispute by pronouncing “‘ just judgment ”’ themselves.
(3) Another gospel phrase, cvvaipw λόγον, “1 compare accounts, make a reckoning” (Matt. xviii. 23 f., xxv. 10), is said by Grimm and Thayer not to occur in “ Greek ”’ writers. Moulton,? however, has pointed out that it occurs in two letters of the 2nd century A.D., one from Oxyrhynchus 4 and the other in the Berlin collection,®> while an ostracon from Dakkeh in Nubia, dated 6 March, 214 a.D., contains the corresponding substantival phrase.® j
(4) Speaking of the devoted couple Aquila and Priscilla, in Rom. xvi. 4, St. Paul uses the words: ‘‘ who for my life laid down their own necks.’”’? Many commentators have taken this phrase literally, as if Aquila and his wife had laid their heads on the block to save the apostle after he had been condemned to death by the executioner’s axe. The majority, however, explain it figuratively: “to lay down one’s own neck ’’ is the same as “ to risk one’s own life.’’ This inter- pretation is undoubtedly confirmed by a passage in one of our new texts. At the destruction of the cities of Herculan- eum and Pompeii in the year 79 A.D. the citizens’ libraries
1 Kyritisch Exegetischer Kommentar von H. A. W. Meyer, I. 27, Géttingen, 1885, p. 482.
? Bulletin de Correspondance Hellénique, 25 (1901) p. 416, ἐπάκουσον, θεά, καὶ κρῖναι τὸ δίκαιον, “‘ hear, goddess, and give right judgment.’’ The editor, Th. Homolle, translates ‘‘ prononce la juste sentence.”
3 The Expositor, April 1901, p. 274 f.
* The Oxyrhynchus Papyri 113.1, ἵνα συνάρωμαι αὐτῶι λόγον, “ that I may make a reckoning with him.”
5 Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 775ι8ι., dxpys (sic) ἂν γένομε (sic) ἐκῖ (ste) καὶ συνάρωμεν λόγον, “ until I come there and we make a reckoning.”
ὁ Wilcken, Griechische Ostraka, No. 1135, ἄχρι λόγου συνάρσεως, ‘‘ till the
teckoning of the account.” 7 οἵτινες ὑπὲρ ris ψυχῆς μου τὸν ἑαυτῶν τράχηλον ὑπέθηκαν. For what follows
ci. Die Christliche Welt, 17 (1903) col. 611 £,
118 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
were of course buried along with the rest of their household furniture. Remains of these domestic libraries have been discovered in the course of excavations, and means have also been found to make the badly charred rolls in part at least legible again. One of the rolls from Herculaneum (No, 1044), for the decipherment of which we are indebted to the ingenuity and learning of Wilhelm Crénert, contains a bio- graphy of the Epicurean Philonides, who flourished about 175-150 B.c. The biographer’s name is unknown; but he must have written after 150 B.c. and of course before the year in which Herculaneum was destroyed, that is to say either in, or at any rate not long before, the age of St. Paul. In this biography there occurs the following passage, mutilated at the beginning, but for our purpose sufficiently clear!: “ [For(?)] the most beloved of his relatives or friends he would readily stake his neck.”
Here we have the same phrase as in the Epistle to the Romans, only with another verb,* and it is reasonable to suppose that in the Greek world “ to lay down, or to stake one’ s neck for somebody ”’ was as current a phrase 3 as, say,
“to go through fire and water for somebody ” is with us. Originating, no doubt, in the phraseology of the law,‘ the phrase was probably in the time of the Epistle to the Romans no longer understood literally. The merit ofthe apostle’s devoted friends is in no way diminished by this observation : it must certainly have been an unusually great sacrifice of the personal kind that Aquila and Priscilla had dared for St. Paul. We may adopt the words of the pagan roll that was buried under the lava of Vesuvius some twenty years after the Epistle to the Romans was written, and say it was some- thing that one would dare only “for the most beloved of one’s relatives or friends.”’
1 Sitzungsberichte der Preuss. Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, 1900, Ρ. 9 51, [ὑπὲρ ?] τοῦ μάλιστ᾽ ἀγαπωμένου τῶν ἀναγκαίων ἢ τῶν φίλων παραβάλοι ἂν ἑτοίμως τὸν τράχηλον. Thé thought is somewhat parallel to Romans v. 7. This, and the other passage about Aquila and Priscilla,—what perspectives they open up for critics who are fond of tracing ‘‘ influences.”
2 St. Paul uses ὑποτίθημι, the text from Herculaneum παραβάλλω τὸν τράχηλον.
3 Cf. above, p. 88, παραβολεύομαι.
‘ The original idea is either that someone suffers himself to be put to death in the place of another, or that he pledges his neck and goes bail for the other.
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT τιο.
(5) St. Paul’s fondness for legal expressions has been often observed in other cases,! and will meet with further confir- mation in these pages. In Phil. iv. 3 we have another curious écho of the language of the documents: “ whose names (are) in the book of life” 3 sounds like the formula ‘‘ whose names are shown in the little book,” 4 which occurs in a document of the year 190 a.D.5 The coincidence might be accidental, and I would not quote it here were it not that the phrase ὧν τὰ ὀνόματα, “‘ whose names,” is certainly demonstrable as a characteristic documentary formula, often occurring in the Berlin papyri, 6.5. No. 181,, (57 A.D.) and No. 72%, (191 A.D.). In No. 344, (second or third century A.D.) it is even found, as in Mark xiv. 32 forsinstance, without a verb, and it is certainly not a Hebraism there. ®
D. The Syntax of the New Testament has hitherto been least of all regarded in the light of the new texts. For instance, one of the greatest weaknesses of Blass’s Grammar is that in the syntactical portions the New Testament is far too much isolated, and phenomena that might be easily 7 illustrated from the pagan inscriptions, papyri, and ostraca, are frequently explained as Hebraisms.* One typical example is the phrase just mentioned, “‘ whose names,” used without any verb. And yet, at the present day, there is so much new solid knowledge to be gained !
(1) To take one example : in the period of the new religious
1 Cf. Bibelstudien, p. 103 [Bible Studies, p. 107], and two excellent articles by Otto Eger: ‘“‘ Rechtswérter und Rechtsbilder in den paulinischen Briefen,’’ Zeitschrift fiir die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft 18 (1917) pp. 84-108, and Rechtsgeschichtliches zum N.T., a rectorial address, Basel, 1919.
2 Cf. for instance Chapter IV., section 8, below (pp. 318-338) : influences of the contemporary legal life of the people. |
3 ὧν τὰ ὀνόματα ἐν βίβλῳ ζωῆς. ‘
4 Some document is thus referred to.
5 Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 432 IIs, ὧν τὰ ὀνόματα τῷ βιβλιδίῳ δεδήλωται. ‘
6 Blass, Grammatik des Neutestamentlichen Griechisch,? p. .77 [English translation,? p. 74], says that καὶ τὸ ὄνομα αὐτῆς is “ still more Hebraic ᾿ than οὗ τὸ ὄνομα, thus making this latter also a Hebraism.—Ludwig Mitteis (letter, Leipzig, 21 May, 1908) refers further to the Oxyrhynchus Papyri No. 4853, and Berliner Griechische Urkunden No. 888,,.
7 Though not so easily as the lexical points, because the indices, when there are any, often take no account of syntax. There is nothing for it but to read the texts.
8 Here tan Dehrunner’s revision constitutes a great advance.
120 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST |
movement the colloquial language of the Mediterranean area exhibits specially interesting changes and additions with regard to prepositional usages.1_ How are we to understand the passages, so important from the point of view of religious history, in which St. Paul and others employ the prepositions ὑπέρ and ἀντί, unless we pay attention to the contemporary “‘ profane ”’ uses?
The phrase βλέπειν ἀπό, “ to beware of,” is explained by Blass 2? as Hebrew, by Wellhausen * as Semitic; and yet it is used in a papyrus letter of strongly vulgar type, 4 August, 41 A.D., by a writer who was not a Jew, but a merchant of Alexandria ¢ : “ and thou, do thou beware thee of the Jews.” ὅ
The combination of εἶναι and similar verbs with εἰς, which is after a Hebrew model according to Blass ὁ and like Lamed according to Wellhausen,’ occurs in inscriptions and papyri.® I have found especially valuable® examples among the inscriptions of Priene, of about the second century B.c.,1° and
1 Cf. A. Thumb, Die griechische Sprache im Zettaltey des Hellenismus, p. 128, and my hints in the Berliner Philologische Wochenschrift, 24 (1904) col. 212 f. Praiseworthy beginnings have been made towards the study of the prepositions in the papyri: Gualtherus Kuhring, De praepositionum-Graecarum in chartis Aegyptiis usu quaestiones selectae (a doctoral dissertation), Bonn, 1906; and Conradus Rossberg, De praepos. Graec. in chartis Aegypt. Ptolemaeorum aetatis usu (doctoral dissertation), Jena, 1909.
2 Grammatik des Neutestamentlichen Griechisch,* p. 127 [Eng. trs.,? p, 126].
3 Einlectung in die drei ersten Evangelien, p. 32.
4 Cf. Wilcken, Zum alexandrinischen Antisemitismus [cf. p. 45, n. 2 above] p. 790. Blau’s remarks should not be overlooked, Papyri und Talmud, p. 81. ‘
5 Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 1079, καὶ od βλέπε σατὸν (sic) ἀπὸ τῶν Ἰουδαίων. Here we have also the supposed ‘‘non-Greek ” phrase, βλέπειν αὐτόν. See also Moulton and Milligan, The Expositor, October 1908, p. 380 f.
6 Grammatik, p. 88 [Eng. trs.,2 p. 85]. See also Jean Psichari, Essai suy le Grec de la Septante, p. 201 f. ᾿
7 Einlettung, p. 32. But ὃ is not the exact equivalent of εἰς. If? were to be imitated we should expect some other preposition, e.g. ἐπί.
8 J. H. Moulton, Grammar, p. 71f.; Radermacher, Neutestamentliche Grammattk, Ὁ. 16 f.
® Because old, and occurring not in vulgar texts but actually in official documents.
10 No. 5039, [τ]αῦτα δὲ εἶναι εἰς φυλακὴν τῆς πόλεως, ‘‘ but that this was for the safeguard of the city.” Thecity of Erythrae has resolved to have a judge from Priene. That the phrase was a regular formula at Erythrae is shown by an inscription from Erythrae published by Georgios I. Zolotas, Χιακων και Ἐρυθραΐκων ἐπιγραφων συναγωγη, Athens, 1908, p. 231 f., τ[αῦ]τα [δ᾽ εἶ]ναι εἰς φ[υ]λα[κ]ὴν τῆς πόλεως. The Priene inscription No. 5941, (ctvca 200 B.c.) is to the same effect : εἶναι δὲ τὸ ψήφισμα τοῦτο ἐπὶ σωτηρίαι τῆς πόλεως, ‘‘ but that this decree is for the salvation of the city.”
Fic. 15.—Ostracon, Thebes, znd cent. a.p. Transfer Order for Wheat. Now in the Author’s collection.
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 121
among those from the Delphinium at Miletus,’ of the Ist cent. A.D.
What light has been shed on the formula eis τὸ ὄνομα ‘in the name,” by the inscriptions, papyri, and not least by the ostraca! To the previous examples? of this, a legal formula 3 current in the Hellenistic world, I can now add from my own collection an ostracon (No. 56) from Thebes, of the second century A.D., which is important also in other respects (Figure 15). It is an order to an official of a State granary to transfer wheat to another person’s account. As deciphered by Wilcken and edited by Paul M. Meyer ὁ it reads :—
Kpeioros® Na..a.[.] 8 Crispus® to Na.. [a] .. (9) F aks . Transfer to the name 15 (for the διάστεϊλον εἰς ὅνο south-west quacter) of ‘Vestidia
εἰς Νότου Secunda (9), represented by 15 Odcor® Yexodda( 2) 10 διὰ Πολλία Pollia Maria thé younger, the
Μαρία 11 νεωτ 12 τὰς τοῦ two and a half and a third and ἃ πυροῦ ἀρτάβ 18 δύο 7- ἢ twenty-fourth artabae™ of μισυ τρίτον τετρακικοστ 14 wheat
(Here the ostracon breaks off.)
' No. 134s, ταῦτα δὲ εἶναι εἰς edocBeralv] τῶν τε θεῶν καὶ τῶν Σεβαστῶν καὶ διαμονὴν τῆς πόλεως, “‘ but that this was for the devout worship of the gods and of the Augusti and for the abiding of the city.”’
2 Bibelstudien, p. 143 ff.; Neue Bibelstudien, p.25; Bible Studies, pp. 146, 197; Theologische Literaturzeitung, 25 (1900) col. 73 f.; and most particularly Wilhelm Heitmiiller, ‘‘ Im Namen Jesu,’’ Gottingen, 1903, p. 100 ff.; and Friedrich Preisigke, Givowesen im griechischen Agypten, Strassburg i. E., 1910, Pp. 149 ff.
4 It is possible, perhaps, that the formula found its way into Greek legal phraseology at a very early period through Semitic influence. Cf. the OW of the Aramaic papyri of Assuan and the observations by Mark Lidzbarski, Deutsche Literaturzeitung, 27 (1906) col. 3213. But this is no reason for regarding it as a Semiticism felt as such in the Imperial period; it had been amalgamated long before. Cf. also Heitmiiller, p. 104,. Jean Psichari, Essat sur le Grec de la Septante, p. 202 f., must not be neglected.
4 Griechische Texte aus Agypten, p. 175 ff.
5 Occurs as the name of a Jew in r Cor. i. 14, Acts xviii. 8.
§ OrNe..a@.([.], Wilcken. Ng... . (Meyer).
7 4.6. εἰς dvou(a). The formula is so common that it is abbreviated.
8 4.4. εἰς Νότου Λ(ιβός); on the quarters of the city of Thebes see Wilcken, Griechische Ostvaka, I. p. 713.
§ 2,6. Odeor(iSia?). The use of the cases (nominative for genitive) is vulgar, as in the Revelation of St. John.
10 The reading is doubtful, Wilcken. It would = Σεκοῦ(ν)δα.
11 It is significant that the Hellenised form of the name, Μαρία, occurs also
here. It seems to have been the more popular, while Μαριάμη or Μαριάμμη rv-~ --~tinuation of notes see next page.
122 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
As the ostracon contains the name “ Maria ” it constitutes a new document in the history of the Jewish 1 Diaspora in Egypt, and more particularly in Thebes.? To claim it on that account as a proof of the genuine ‘‘ Judaeo-Greek”’ character of our formula would be trivial, in view of the numerous and early pagan examples that are already known.
(2) According to Mark vi. 7 Jesus sent forth His disciples δύο δύο,“ by two and two.” A distributive numeral relation is here expressed in the Greek by repeating the cardinal number. Wellhausen 3 says this is not truly Greek, but 4 it is found in Aeschylus5 and Sophocles.¢ These examples would be sufficient to account for the same use in the Sep- tuagint and in the New Testament; it agrees with the
1 It is not very probable that this Maria was a Christian.
2 Cf. previous examples in Schiirer, Geschichte des jiidischen Volkes, III.8 p. 19 ff. [the Jew Danoilos mentioned on p. 23 must be struck out, for the papyrus passage in question is now read differently by Wilcken; cf. Epistulae Privatae Graecae ed. S. Witkowski, p. 84,2 p. 109]; and Wilcken, Griechische Ostraka, I. pp. 281 ff., 523 f. [the persons here mehtioned with the name of Simon need not all be Jews; cf. Bibelstudien, p. 184; Bible Studies, p. 315, πῃ. 2], 535.
8. Das Evangelium Marci tibersetzt und evklart, Berlin, 1903, p. 52.
4 Cf. Theologische Literaturzeitung, 23 (1898) col. 630 f.
5 Pers. 981, μυρία μυρία, ‘‘ by myriads.”
6 From the lost drama called Eris the Antiatticist [an anonymous lexico- grapher of late date, edited by Bekker; see W. Schmid, Dery Aiticismus, I. p.. 208, etc. TR.] quoted μίαν μίαν in the sense of κατὰ μίαν; this was first pointed out by Thumb, Die griechische Sprache, p. 128. Blass, Grammatik des Neutestamentlichen Griechisch,? p. 146 (Engl. ed.? pp. 145, 330], rightly inferred from this that the Atticists opposed this form of expression, which they therefore must have found present in the vernacular, ‘‘ and it was not merely Jewish Greek.””
Continuation of notes to page 121 :—
(Josephus; ot Mariamne ἢ was the more affected and coquettish. These forms well illustrate the various ways of secularising a Hebrew name: by the omission or addition of a letter a Greek ending is obtained.
12 ¢.¢, vewr(épa), abbreviated like our ‘' jun.” or.“ jr.”
13 26, ἀρτάβ(ας). The “ artaba ’’ was a measure of corn.
14 As to this form (Meyer’s reading) cf. something similar in Mayser, Gram- matth dev griechischen Papyri, Ὁ. 318.
415 ζ,6.. ‘ to the account of.”
16 This use of the preposition διά, occurring also in the papyri (cf. L. Wenger, Die Stelivertretung im Rechte der Papyvi, Leipzig, 1906, p. 9 ff.), is of important bearing on the interpretation of the formula ‘‘ through Christ’ and the conception of the Paraclete; cf. Adolph Schettler, Die paulinische Formel “* Durch Christus,’ Tabingen, 1907, p. 28 ad fin,
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW ΤΕΒΤΑΜΕΝΤ 123
Semitic use,! it is true, but it is good popular Greek for all that. It has been shown by Karl Dieterich*® to exist in Middle Greek, and has remained in Modern Greek down to the present day. We can trace this use, therefore, through a period of two thousand five hundred years. A welcome new link in the long chain of witnesses from Aeschylus to the Bible and from the Bible till to-day was added by a letter of the 3rd century A.D., among the Oxyrhynchus Papyri (No. 121), in which a certain Isidorus writes to one Aurelius to ‘bind the branches by three and three in bundles.’”’4 Still more recently there has come in the Oxyrhynchus Papyri (No. 886,9:.) a magical formula of the 3rd cent. A.D., which exhibits a curious mixture of this and a prepositional con- struction.
(3) In the next place we may select from the abundance of new syntactical observations an example which has lately met with fairly general recognition, viz. the peculiar “‘ nomina- tive” πλήρης in the prologue to St. John (i. 14), which touches on a celebrated problem of this gospel. If I am not
1 We have here one of the numerous coincidences between the popular phraseology of different languages. Cf. the popular distributive zwei und zwei in German; in English “two and two.” A curious case of an analogous idiom (which, had it come down to us in a Greek literary work, would certainly have been reckoned as a Semiticism) is the duplication of ‘‘ between,” (zwischen) which may often be observed in the German of writers and spzech- makers, 6.6. “ between the Lutherans and between the Calvinists ’’ instead of ‘‘ between the Lutherans and the Calvinists.’’ [One would expect this anomalous use of zwischen, which might be due to the desire for emphasis, to be extremely rare. But is ‘‘ between the Lutherans” much more absurd than “‘ between each stroke ’’ in the idiomatic English phrase, ‘‘ he paused between each stroke? ’’ (An example occurs in the English of this book: “‘ between every word,’’ p. 230.) In any case the suggested analogy with two and two seems remote. TR.]
3 Untersuchungen zur Geschichte dev griechischen Sprache, p. 188.
3 Cf. Jean Psichari, Essai sur le Grec de la Septante, p. 183 1.
4 iva (sic) δήσῃ τρία pia. Cf. δήσατε δεσμὰς δεομάς, “bind, them in bundles,” which Blass,? p. 146 [Engl. ed.? p. 145], considers to have been the original reading in Matt. xiii. 30. Ὁ
5 foe [ = αἶρε] κατὰ δύο δύο, “‘ take them up by two and two.”—In the Oxy- thynchus Papyri No. 940, (letter, 5th cent. A.D.) μίαν μίαν is used, so the editors (Grenfell and Hunt) think, in the sense of una = “ together ”’ ἴδε: VI. 1908, Ρ. 310).
6 ὡς μονογενοῦς παρὰ πατρὸς πλήρης [Codex D πλήρη] χάριτος καὶ ἀληθείας. This πλήρης occurs also in other passages of the New Testament and the Septuagint.
124 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
mistaken,! this ‘‘ nominative ” has been regarded by a pious Silesian commentator of our own day as a peculiarly fine dogmatic distinction of the inspired sacred text. In matters linguistic, however, the commentator’s piety is not enough. I agree, mutatis mutandis, with Hans Thoma,? who once told the Protestant clergy of Baden that it would be more desirable ‘o have a sinner painting good pictures than to have a saint painting bad ones. The present case, therefore, must be decided by cold philological considerations, and philology tells us, on the evidence of papyri,* ostraca, and wooden tablets, that πλήρης as used by the people had often shrunk and become indeclinable. The oldest example hitherto known 5 is in the dreams of the twin-sisters and Ptolemaeus, é 160 B.c., contemporary, therefore, with the Septuagint usage. Another pre-Johannine example is afforded by. an Egyptian wooden tablet, probably of the reign of Augustus.” Next come a number of quotations from papyri, and, as might have been expected, the statistics have been further enriched by the ostraca,® also by popular literature such as the Acts of Thomas. Moulton * is quite right in saying that a Greek
1 I could not lay my hand on the passage in 1908, but since the edition of 1909 it has been found for me by Wilh. Michaelis. In the Evangelische Kirchenzeitung, No. 47, of το Nov., 1893, p. 770, ὟΝ. Koelling wrote: ‘‘ The Holy Ghost suffered the apostle to write the nominative instead of the genitive, because the Lord Jesus is always our Nominative. He is the Name, Nomen, that is above allnames. We are only His Genitive.”
2 (The painter, ὃ. 1839, ὦ. 1924. He was the holder of two honorary degrees of the University of Heidelberg, Dr. phil. and D. theol., the latter conferred in October, 1909. TR.]
3 Bericht tiber die Tatigkeit des Wissenschaftlichen Predigervereins der evangelischen Geistlichkeit Badens im Jahre 1906, Karlsruhe, 1907, p. 10.
4 Cf. Blass, Grammatik des Neutestamentlichen Griechisch,? Ὁ. 84 and even 1p. 81 (Engl. ed. p. 81]. Hermann Diels (letter, Berlin W., 22 July, 1908) refers further to A. Brinkmann, Rheinisches Museum, 54, p. 94, and Berl. Philol. Wochenschrift, 1900, col. 252.
5 Cf. J. H. Moulton, Grammar,* p. 50, and Mayser, Grammatik dey griechi- schen Papyri, p.63. All other needful references will be found there.
'® Somnia Gemellarum et Ptolemaei, Leyden Papyrus, C Il,, (Papyri Gracci Musei . . . Lugduni-Batavi, ed. C. Leemans, t. I. [1843] p. 118).
7 Revue Archéologique, 29 (1875) p. 233 £. ἔδωκα αὐτῶ (sic) τὰ ναῦλα πλήρης καὶ τὰς δαπάνας, “1 have given him his full fare and money to spend.”
§ Wilcken, Griechische Ostvaka, No. 1071, Thebes, 16 February, 185 A.D.; probably also No. 1222, Thebes, Roman period.
® Acta Apostolorum Apocrypha ed. Bonnet, II. 2, p. 212,, and also 118,0. (Reference sent by F. Rostalski, in a letter dated Myslowitz, 13 Dec., 1911).
10 Grammar,’ p. 50. ‘
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW ΤΕΘΒΤΑΜΕῈΝΤ 125
with a literary training would not have used the shrunken form. But he goes too far in assuming that it was first introduced into the Gospel of St. John by a copyist. The copyists worked as a rule quite mechanically, like our com- positors; when they made linguistic changes in the text of the New Testament they did so under the orders of trained theologians—men who generally must have been under the influence of Atticism and opposed to the vernacular.1_ Where the textual authorities show variations, then, in the gospels and in St. Paul popular forms have always a fair claim to preference. There is no reason for regarding πλήρης in St. John as not original. The vulgar form occurring in the lapidary style of the prologue—a field anemone amid the marble blocks—is in fact a clear token of the popular character which even this gospel bears. The scholar: whose instinct may have been misled by the word Logos in the first line is brought back to the right road by this undoubtedly vulgar form.
4. At the end of these syntactic examples I place a line from the gospel,? which, owing to the history of its inter- pretation, is of singular interest in sacred philology. One of the sayings of Jesus, containing no dogma and therefore for some people insignificant,’ but radiant with warm light to the sympathetic observer of the story of the Passion, has been fated, in spite of its having been quite correctly rendered intuitively in the earliest Bible translations, to be mis- interpreted, nay mishandled, under the influence of the lifeless normalising of the Atticists. On the night of the betrayal, after Judas had greeted and kissed the Master, Jesus said to him, according to Matthew xxvi. 50, ἑταῖρε, ἐφ᾽ ὃ πάρει; “Friend, wherefore art thou come?”’ To anyone
1 The whole problem, as it affects the gospels, has been investigated by Wilhelm Michaelis in a dissertation forthe Berlin degree of Licentiate in Theology, ‘‘ Der Attizismus und das Neuve Testament,” Zeitschrift fiir die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft, 1923, p. 91 ff.
. 3 [This section, which is one of the additions to the fourth edition, appeared: in shortened form in The Expository Times 33 (August 1922) pp. 491-3, “ Friend, wherefore art thou come? ” translated by Rev. Clarence Craig. TR.]
3 [It is omitted, for instance, in Charles Foster Kent’s Shorter Bible: The New Testament, London [1918], p. 49, though that work aims “to single out... those parts of the Bible which are of vital interest and practical value to the present age “’ (p. v.). TR.)
126 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
reading them with the eye of an old-time Hellenist these simple words cause as little difficulty as that other similar line from the gospel in the fragmentary 1 parable of a wedding (Matthew xxii. 12), ‘‘ Friend, how camest thou in hither?’ ? Linguistically there is no difficulty.
Both ἐπί with the accusative and the verb πάρειμι. are completely free from ambiguity. For the combination of the two we find exact parallels in profane literature: Plato, Gorgias 447 ἐπ᾽ αὐτό ye τοῦτο πάρεσμεν, “that is why we are here,’ and, still more apt, because interrogative, Aristophanes, Lysistrata 1101 ἐπὶ τί πάρεστε δεῦρο ; “ why are ye here present? ’’ Such ‘“ why here? ” questions must have been put in this form times without number in actual daily life. .
The words addressed to Judas are also a “‘ why here?” question. The use of the relative ὅς as an interrogative is by no means rare in late Greek, although grammarians of note thought it incredible before the-late texts had been system-- atically worked through. It has its analogies in other languages and its counterpart in the frequent use of the interrogative τίς as a relative.? I have collected together in a footnote * some examples of the interrogative ὅς that had been noticed by other grammarians (Jannaris, Radermacher, A. T. Robertson, Blass and Debrunner). It is worth remark-
1 The beginning-of the parable is lost; only the conclusion is presérved, beginning with Matt. xxii.11. What precedes is another parable of a wedding, concluding with verse 1o. :
2 ἑταῖρε, πῶς εἰσῆλθες ὧδε;
5 Moulton, Einleitung in die Sprache des N.T., Heidelberg, 1911, p. 149 (A Grammar of New Testament Greek, i. (Prolegomena),® p. 93), gives good examples from the LXX, papyri, and inscriptions. Cf. also Blass-Debrunner,® § 298, 4. Iadd LXX Lev. xxi. 17 (cf. Karl Huber, Untersuchungen tiber den Sprachchavakter des gviechischen Leviticus, Giessen, 1916, p. 69). The same ‘thing is found also in vulgar Latin (F. Pfister, Rheinisches Museum, 67 (1912)
p. 203 f.). 4 Pseudo(?)-Justin, Cohortatio ad Gentiles V. 78 (Migne, Patrologia Graeca 6, col. 253 A) δι’ ἣν αἰτίαν... προσέχεις Ὁμήρῳ; Eusebius, Praeparatio
Evangelica vi. 7 (Gaisford p. 257 d) dv δὲ ἕνεκα ταῦτα προσήνεγκα τῷ λόγῳ; Apophthegmata Patrum, Migne, Patrologia Graeca 65, col. 105 C ᾿Αρσένιε, δι’ ὃ ἐξῆλθες; Usener, Der heilige Tychon, Leipzig, 1907, p. 50 refers also to the interrogative formulae ἀνθ᾽ ὅτου (in Cyril of Alexandria, and perhaps already in Julian the Apostate), ὅτου χάριν (in Sophronius), οὗ χάριν (in the biography of St. Tycho by Johannes Eleemon), and μέχρις οὗ ποτέ in the “ Spiritual Meadow ’”’ of Johannes Moschi; exact references will be found in Usener, loc. cit.
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW ΤΕΒΤΑΜΕΝΤ᾽ 127
ing that our gospel passage is at present the earliest instance found in literature.
The earliest translators of the New Testament understood the interrogative sense of the sentence perfectly. We must not think of these men as scholars who spoke one single language and had learnt others at school, in order to translate line for line with all the apparatus of learning. Much rather were they, like the translators of the sayings of Jesus, polyglot Christians who from childhood had spoken two or three languages. How often do we find this same type even to-day in the modern East! Of course they spoke the living languages with their corruptions, and Greek regardless of Atticist affectations. In translating they were guided simply by unsophisticated linguistic instinct, and we can be sure that they but seldom went astray. Hence the earliest translations, the Old Latin (Vetus Itala) and the Old Syriac, which are generally cited only as authorities for the text, are not only important sources for the history of exegesis, but also a mine of information for the modern expositor. Now the Vetus Itala and the Syriac (Sinaitic) version both understood the words addressed to Judas as a ‘‘ why here? ”’ question; and many other translations, ancient and modern, have followed them on this right path.!
Misinterpretations of the passage began early. They are all based upon failure to recognise the interrogative meaning of the 6. As early as 812 A.D. the Codex Armachanus, which is a representative of the Hibernian text,? reads “‘ amice, fac ad quod venisti,”’ thus restoring the relative sense by violence : “friend, do that for which thou art come.” Eight hundred years later, when the official Papal editions of the Vulgate, the Sixtine and the Clementine, print “ ad quid venisti? ”’
1T select a few: the Latin Vulgate; Luther; Johannes Piscator, the Calvinist, in his work on the Bible (German, Herborn, 1604; Latin, Herborn, 1613); the English Authorised Version of 1611, ‘‘ friend, wherefore art thou come?” (and its predecessors, Tyndale, 1526; Wycliffe, 1389; and the toth cent. Old English version, Tr.]; the Dutch “ Statenbijbel’’ [Bible translated and published by authority of the States-General, 1637. ΤᾺ]; the translation into popular Greek by Maximos Kalliupolita (Geneva, 1638), ὦ φίλε, διατὲ ἦλθες ἐδῶ; as also the edition published by Queen Olga (Athens, 1900), φίλε, διατί ἦλθες; the French translations by David Martin and by J. F. Ostervald; the Italian (Roma, 1892); the versions in German
by Weizsicker and by Schlégl. 3 Nouum Testamentum Latine ed. White (1911), p. vii.
128 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
instead of Jerome’s “ δά quod 1 venisti? ” the interrogative sense is fortunately not done away with, but the text is, at least in form, made more elegant. That Euthymius (12th cent.), a Byzantine expositor, trained and working under strong Atticist influence, should expressly reject the interro- gative meaning of 6,2 is not to be wondered at : that is dictated by the same feeling as the ‘‘ fac ad quod venisti’”’ of the Irish codex. But for that reason Euthymius should not be cited as an authority in those cases in which Atticist linguistic instinct conflicts with the living spoken language.
The influence of these Atticist misinterpretations has been very strong down to the present day. The majority of modern commentators, being at the mercy of the older and to some extent obsolete grammars, and generally powerless to criticise them, are suspicious of the interrogative 6. It is ‘therefore not surprising that the English Revised Version of 1881, for instance, altered the correct translation of the Authorised Version of 1611, “ friend, wherefore art thou come?” into “friend, do that for which thou art come’’—exactly the text of the Book of Armagh.‘
Two other recent attempts are yet more open to objection, in spite of the high reputation of their authors. Julius Wellhausen,® with the approval of E. Klostermann,® explains the sentence as abbreviated: ‘‘ [dost thou kiss me for the purpose] for which, as we see, thou art come?” He thinks there was no need to say ‘‘ dost thou kiss me,” because the kissing was just being enacted at the moment. Klostermann
1 This ad quod is a Latin vulgarism, exactly corresponding to the Greek
ἐφ᾽ 6, doubtless no mere imitation of the Greek original by the translator. Cf. the usage of Gregory of Tours (F. Pfister, Rheinisches Museum, 67 (1912) Pp. 203). Ν
2 Cf. Ε. Klostermann (in Lietzmann’s Handbuch) on Matt. xxvi. 50; he follows the authority of Euthymius.
3 It has been remarked fairly frequently that Old Irish Biblical scholarship was strongly influenced by the Greek; cf. for instance my article, “ Hisperica Famina in einem Evangelienkodex,” Deutsche Literaturzeitung 34 (1913) col. (325 ff,
4 [So ‘‘ The Twentieth Century New Testament, published by the Sunday School Union, London (preface dated Sept. 1904) says, “‘ Friend, do what you have come for”; R. F. Weymouth, The New Testament in Modern Speech (1903), ‘‘ Friend, carry out your intention’; James Moffatt, The New Testament: a New Translation, ‘‘My man, do your errand.’ Tr.]
5 Das Evangelium Matthaei erkldrt, Berlin, 1904, p. 140.
® Loc. cit., p. 3374.
| AIIOU OXL YY | ποαχοσφᾳϑ. ἀ 9191 NOY} 218 ΘΙΟΙΘαΘΊ ΛΑ, | fiadpue 9 <P?
(‘19UMO 911 10 τπιοιβϑιτι θά 464) Ε Ῥαθϑϑτλλ Ioposyy jo uorssassod 912 ul mou “a'v Ἵπ90 151 ‘erIAS τι01} ATqeqord “91401) sseTD & UO τιοιγιχοςτιγ--- Ὁ] “OTT
wos Wee OL ΣΝ
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT τ29
translates stil! more strangely: ‘‘ [dost thou abuse the kiss] for the purpose for which thou art here?’’! I have the feeling here that the reference to “ enacting ᾿᾿ disposes of this interpretation. The evangelist is not trying to describe a mimic performance in a passion play, in which the action of one player and the words of another are nicely calculated to coincide and match one another, but a fragment of tragic reality. Imagine those words of Jesus as they were spoken in the reality of the night of betrayal, and no one with feelings unperverted can understand them thus.
Friedrich Blass 2 on the other hand, in whom the Atticist dislike of an interrogative 6 is more easily intelligible, has no compunction in taking strong measures with the clearly
established text. He thinks ἑταῖρε must be a corruption of αἶρε or ἑταῖρε alpe, “ take,” or “ friend, take [that] for which thou art come.” Thus is sacrificed to Atticism one of the most authentic, most wondrous of the Redeemer’s sayings, an unintentioned self-revelation of the Betrayed that shines forth into the darkness of the betrayer’s infamy. Though he has sunk so low, still He calls him ‘‘ companion, comrade, friend.’’ How could the.gospel of the Passion ever surrender its claim to this human, this more than human utterance, except under dire necessity ? -
There is no necessity. Anyone who, distrustful of the historical method in Biblical’ philology, demands a special
illustrative quotation for each single passage, can be satisfied in this instance. A Greek motto found on Syrian glasses of the gospel period teaches us that this very question ἐφ᾽ ὃ πάρει ; was current coin in the language of the people. In the collection of my friend Theodor Wiegand there is a glass goblet,4 obtained by him in the Crimea. Inscribed on it externally, and running completely round it like a band or ring, we find the inscription which is reproduced ὅ in Figure 16.
1 These interpretations are akin to the older one by Curt Stage, Das Neue Testament iibersetat in die Sprache dev Gegenwart, Leipzig (published by Reclam), [1896], p. 67: ‘‘ (Do not dissemble with your kiss, but do) what you are here for.” 2 Grammatik des Neutestamentlichen Griechisch (1896), p. 172.
8. No doubt Matthew has the primary tradition here; the parallel passage in Luke xxii. 48 is worded more in the style appropriate to the cult.
4 [Now in the possession of Dr. Rendel Harris, Birmingham. TR.]
5 Our facsimile gives the inscription in the size of the original, but of course without indication of the ring-like arrangement. It is not improbable that the goblet came from Syria.
130 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST ©
To Wiegand I am indebted for a drawing of the inscription, while to him and to Georg Méller (whose premature death we deplore) I owe my knowledge of the existence of other speci- mens. Wiegand assigns the writing to the first century A.D. He has of course examined it minutely and describes it thus : The inscription is in two halves, one on each half of the goblet, which is pressed out of two half-moulds, and the spacing is such that one cannot see where the motto begins.
I have no doubt that it begins with the question ἐφ᾽ ὃ πάρει ; and that εὐφραίνου is the answer. The inscription on the goblet and the text in the gospel afford each other mutual support.! If, with ample security in popular Greek usage, we are compelled by intrinsic reasons to regard the sentence in the story of the Passion as a question, then from the Syrian goblet comes also a question, the merry question. ““why here? ᾿᾿ addressed to the guest, followed by the equally merry answer.”
The Berlin Museum possesses other similar glasses: one is No. 11,866 in the catalogue, the other is No. 212 in the Von Gans collection. Both display the orthographic variant ἐφ᾽ ᾧ instead of ἐφ᾽ 8.3 -Goblet No. 11,866 has before and after εὐφραίνου a vertical line caused by moulding, so that, as in Wiegand’s specimen, which is without a line, the begin- ning and end of the motto are not at once recognisable. The Von Gans goblet No. 212 on’ the other hand has a vertical
1 In itself εὐφραίνου ἐφ᾽ ὃ πάρει would also be possible. But what would. be the sense of saying ‘‘ rejoice for that thou art here’? It would be an extremely feeble motto. The proposal to translate thus was made to me by someone who was influenced by having naturally taken ὅ first of all as a relative. An alternative suggestion from the same quarter was, “ rejoice so long as thou art here,” 1.6. ‘‘ while thou art alive.’’ This version is also very little convincing, and it is grammatically harsh.
3 Cf. Psalm ciii. (οἷν) 15, οἶνος εὐφραίνει καρδίαν ἀνθρώπου, ‘ wine maketh glad the heart of man,’’ and the frequent inscription on black- figured drinking vessels from Attica, χαῖρε καὶ πίει. (On the form πίει and ' the interpretation of the whole line cf. Otto Lagercrantz, Eranos, vol. 14, p. 171 ff.) [In the N.T. Luke xii. 19; xv. 23, 24, 29, 32, etc. TR.]
3 For the same variant (ἐφ᾽ & instead of ἐφ᾽ 3) furnished by a minority of the MSS. in Matt. xxvi. 50 the Syrian glasses afford, therefore, an instructive parallel. -The variant can hardly be based on any objective consideration, but probably points to the fact that at an early date o and w were no longer distinguished in pronunciation. The writers and copyists of the New Testa- ment therefore had the same chance of varying the spelling as the unknown persons who provided the motto for the Syrian glassmakers,
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT _ 131
moulding-line only after εὐφραίνου, which might therefore mark the end and the beginning of the motto. Since other vessels of similar kind with mottoes are also extant elsewhere,} it is allowable to assume that this type with motto was widespread and generally known. I do not wish to hint that the translator of the Aramaic of Jesus with his ἐφ᾽ ὃ πάρει was influenced by the motto; but I assume that he, no less than the motto itself, drew this usage of the interrogative 6 from
the language of the people.
E. We pass now to consider briefly, in conclusion, the style of the New Testament in the light of the profane texts.? Let us take as our example the Johannine writings. It has become an inviolable tradition with commentators to repre- sent the Johannine style as particularly Semitic, chiefly on account of its preference for paratactic constructions, especially ‘‘and ... and,” which occurs so frequently. So recent a writer as E. von Dobschiitz,? who distinguishes an original and an adaptation in the First Epistle of St. John, has these observations on the style of the original, conveyed, it may be remarked, in a highly paratactic style of his own :—
1 Cf. (as I am informed by Th. Wiegand, 28 July, 1921) G. Sangiorgi, Collezione di vetyi antichi, Milano-Roma, 1914, p. 33 (Plate 19): a Syrian glass, found in the province of Cremona, is inscribed with our motto (ἐφ᾽ @ πάρει; εὐφραίνου. The editor has reversed the two halves of the motto. If we once begin to give heed to this type of vessel, we shall probably be able to discover yet more examples.—So I conjectured when preparing my MS. for the fourth edition, and before the printing was complete I heard from Wiegand of a glass goblet in the collection of Mr. Thomas E. H. Curtis, of Plainfield (New Jersey). The editor, Gisela M. A. Richter, ‘‘ Art in America,” vol. 2 (1914), Ῥ- 85, gives the text thus: Εὐφραίνου ἐφ᾽ [sic] ὦ Πάρις, and translates: ‘‘‘ Rejoice in that in which Paris rejoiced’’; that is, in the beauty of women,’ There must be either a misreading here or an error in the making of the vessel. The facsimile of the goblet (Plate 17, No. 14) unfortu- nately shows only the εὐυφραινου side. [W. M. Calder, Classical Review, 38 (1924) p. 30, points out that πάρις 18 for πάρεις; the use of the Epic and Ionic form εἷς for ef can be paralleled from Hellenistic inscriptions. Tr.]
2 Cf. the general observations above, p. 69 ff.
3“ Johanneische Studien,” Zeitschrift fiir die neutestamentliche Wissen- schaft und die Kunde des Urchristentums, 8 (1907) p. 7. Wilhelm Heitmiiller in the Gegenwartsbibel (Die Schriften des N. T. . . ., herausg. von Johannes Weiss), II., Géttingen, 1907, 3, p. 175, pronounced a similar judgment, and even ventured from the structure of the sentences and their connexion to draw conclusions as to the birth-certificate of the writer: ‘‘ They betray beyond doubt the Jewish origin of the evangelist.”
132 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT. EAST
“Thesis stands beside thesis, sentence opposes sentence; there are none of the delicate connecting particles, appropriate to every gradation in the thought, which are so abundant in classical Greek. These are no doubt greatly diminished in the colloquial language of the Hellenistic period. But a style such as we have here is really not Greek. It is Semitic thinking that is here displayed. Only in the Septuagint is there anything like it to be found.”
Even apart from our new texts, we could appeal to the facts of Indo-Germanic philology in refutation of this branding of parataxis as ‘not Greek.” Parataxis appears to be not Greek only from the orthodox point of view of the Atticists, who laid it down that the periodic structure with hypotaxis was good, beautiful, and Greek pay excellence. As a matter of fact, parataxis is the original form of every primitive speech, including the Greek ; it survived continuously in the language of the people, and even found its way into literature when the ordinary conversation of the people was imitated. The facts are admirably stated by Karl Brugmann !:—
“It is beyond doubt that the language of Homer exhibits on the whole far more of the original paratactic structure than the language of Herodotus and the Attic prose writers, such as Thucydides, Plato, Demosthenes. . . . This is not because the language of Homer is older and closer to the primitive Indo- Germanic type of language, but rather because the epic is less detached than the later literature from the natural soil of lan-
1 Griechische Grammatik® (Handbuch der klassischen Altertumswissenschaft, II. 14), Miinchen, 1900, p. 555 f. (4{Thumb], p. 640). Eduard Norden in his great work, Agnostos Theos, Leipzig and Berlin, 1913, p. 367 ff., controverting my view of the xai-sentences which are piled up as it were in series in Luke, defends them as Semitic. I think we have here a special case of what I have already touched on at p. 4 above—radical difference of opinion as to the concept “Greek.” Of course it is certain that artistic Attic prose prefers hypotaxis to parataxis. But the texts on stone and papyrus, written by people who were not Semites, prove that parataxis was as natural to the popular language of unconventionalised Greek as to the Semites. If we possessed more texts from Greece of the classical period of direct popular origin, we should probably find parataxis in living use even there. But Brugmann’s indirect examples are sutticient. The fact was clearly recognised already in Alexander Buttmann’s Grammatik des Neutestamentlichen Spvrachgebrauchs, Berlin, 1859, p. 248. Cf. further Radermacher, Wiener Studien 31 .(1909), p. 8f.; Lagercrantz, Eranos 14 p. 171 ff.; F. Pfister, Die parataktische Darstellungsform in der volkstiimlichen Erzdhlung, Wochenschrift fir klassische Philologie 28 (1911) col. 809 ff.; Witkowski, Glotta 6 p. 22f.; Otto Weinreich, Neue Urkunden zur Sarapis-Religion, Tiibingen, 1919, p. 14.
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW ΤΕΒΤΑΜΕΝΤ 133
guage. Wherever in the Indo-Germanic sphere a genuine popular dialect is found to exist side by side with a more highly developed literary language, we see that the popular dialect makes far more use of the paratactic form of expression than the literary language. If a work of later date, say, for example, of the 3rd century B.C., were preserved, presenting to us as true a specimen of popular sentence-construction as the Homeric poems, the language of Homer would probably in this respect appear scarcely more archaic. There is in fact no very great difference to be detected between Homeric Greek and the Modern Greek dialects in this particular. When, in the age of literary practice and scholastic training, we find authors using paratactic construc- tions where they might have employed hypotactic forms, such being in general use in the cultivated language, we may generally assume that there has been an upward borrowing from the forms of the language of every-day life.”
Brugmann illustrates this last remark by examples from the Greek Comedy and from Demosthenes; in both cases there is conscious imitation of the popular 7 style.?
If we have once recognised the popular character of the Johannine style—not the result, this, of conscious imitation, but in large measure a wild, natural growth—then we have solved the riddle which our Atticist commentators with their censorial attitude are always discovering. St. John is popular in style both when he is narrating. something, or making reflections of his own, and when he reproduces the sayings of Christ. It is easy to find instances to prove this— both of-the popular narrative style, with its short paratactic sentences and its “and... and,” and of the stately style, impressive by the very simplicity of its popular appeal, in
1 This is obvious, of course, in the case of Comedy. (Cf. D. B. Durham, The Vocabulary of Menandey considered in its relation to the Koine, Diss., Princeton, 1913, p. 35 ff.,and the Latin parallels in F. Pfister, Rheinisches Museum, New Series 67 [1912] p. 197.) We have here the reason why the
«vocabulary of Comedy finds such frequent echoes in the New Testament. It is not because the apostles were regular attendants at the theatre or readers of Comedy, but Comedy and New Testament both draw from the popular colloquial language as from a common spring.
2 The examples in Wilhelm Schmid, Dey Atticismus, I. p. 422, II. p. 299, III. p. 326, are also very well worth noting. Cf. also Eduard Schwyzer, Neugriechische Syntax und altgriechische, Neue Jahrbiicher fir das klassische Altertum, etc., 1908, 1 Abteilung, 21 Band, p. 500; and Jean Psichari, Essai
suy le Grec de la Septante, p. 186.
134 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST.
which Divinity manifests itself in the first person to strangers and devotees.
One of the most vivid examples of popular narrative style is the report by an Egyptian named Ptolemaeus to Damo- xenus, in the year 160 B.c. concerning his dreams * (Paris Papyri, No. 51). I should have liked to reprint this extra- ordinarily interesting text here, but it is advisable to await the appearance of Wilcken’s edition of the papyri of the Ptolemaic period.”
Another good example is the letter of consolation written by Irene, an Egyptian woman of the second century A.D., and found at Oxyrhynchus. This letter will be discussed in a later chapter.’
Here is the story told by two “ pig-merchants,’”’ about 171 A.D., in their letter of complaint to the Strategus, found at Euhemeria (Kasr el-Banat) in the Fayam4:—
ΓΙ
. ἐχθὲς ἥτις ἦν ιθ τοῦ [ὄϊντος ... Yesterday, which was the 19th of the present month Thoth, as we were returning about daybreak from the village of Theadelphia in the division κακοῦργοί τινες ἀνὰ [μ]έσον Iodv- | of Themistes, certain male- Sevxias καὶ τῆς Θεαδελφείας καὶ | factors came upon us between ἔδησαν ἡμᾶς σὺν καὶ ὁ τῷ paySwdro- | Polydeucia and Theadelphia, and bound us, with the guard of the tower also, and assaulted : τ _ | us with very many stripes, and τὸν [Πασίω]να καὶ eioavijpaly ἡμ]ῶν | wounded Pasion, and robbed χοιρίδι[ον] u καὶ ἐβάσ[ταξαν τὸν τοῦ | us of τ pig, and carried off Πασίωνος κιτῶνα. .. καί. «. Pasion’s coat... and... .
μηνὸς O86 ἀνερχομένων ἡμῶν ὅ ἀπὸ κώμης Θεαδελφείας Θεμίστου μερίδος
ὑπὸ τὸν ὄρθρον ἐπῆλθαν ἡμεῖν
φύλακι καὶ πληγαῖς ἡμᾶς πλίσταις
ἥκισαν κ[αὶ] τραυματιαῖον ἐποίησαν
T Notices et Extraits, 18, 2, p. 323 f.
2 Wilcken has given us the text provisionally, by way of ἀρῥαβών, in the Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung 6, p. 204 ff.
3 Cf. p. 176, below.
4 Faytm Towns and their Papyri, No. 108.
5 This ‘‘ incorrect” genitive absolute with a following dative occurs in™ exactly the same way in John iv. 51, and many other New Testament passages. For parallels in vulgar Latin see F. Pfister, Rheinisches Museum 67 (1912) p. 206 f.
6 For this pleonastic σὺν καί cf. μετὰ καί in Phil. iv. 3, and see Neue Bibel- studien, p. 93, Bible Studies, PP- 64, 265 1.
7 Cf. the parallel descriptive details of the robber scene in the parable of the Good Samaritan, Luke x. 30: mention of the road on which the outrage took place (‘‘ from Jerusalem to Jericho ”’), the stripes (‘‘ beat him,” R.V.),
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW ΤΕΘΒΤΑΜΕΝΤ 135
How firmly this “and . . . and”’ style was rooted in the language of the people is shown by a much later bill of com- plaint of a Christian Egyptian woman who had been ill- treated by her husband (Oxyrhynchus Papyri, No. 903, 4th century A.D.).
The parallelism of the style comes out most clearly if we compare texts of similar content. For instance we might take these sentences from the story of the man born blind (John ix. 7, 11) :—
K ‘ > > ας ΄ as 7. Καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ « ὕπαγε νίψαι εἰς τὴν κολυμβήθραν τοῦ Σιλωάμ (ὃ ἑρμηνεύεται ἀπεσταλμένος). ἀπῆλθεν οὖν καὶ ἐνίψατο καὶ ἦλθεν βλέπων. II. ἀπεκρίθη ἐκεῖνος - ὃ ἄνθρωπος ὃ
, » a N > , λεγόμενος Ἰησοῦς πηλὸν ἐποίησεν καὶ ἐπέχρισέν μον τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς x “᾿- ΄ Lg 7 > Ν καὶ εἶπέν μοι ὅτι ὕπαγε εἰς τὸν Σιλωὰμ καὶ νίψαι. ἀπελθὼν οὖν καὶ
νιψάμενος ἀνέβλεψα.
7. And said unto him, Go, wash in the pool of Siloam (which is by interpretation, Sent). He went away there- fore, and washed, and came seeing. 31. He answered, The man that is called Jesus made clay, and anointed mine eyes, and said unto me, Go to Siloam, and wash: so I went away and washed, and I re- ceived sight. (R.V.)
Compare with these sentences one of four records of cures in- scribed on a marble tablet some time after 138 a.D., probably at the temple of Asclepius on the island in the Tiber at
Rome 1 :—
Οὐαλερίῳ "Arpw στρατιώτῃ τυφλῷ ἐχρημάτισεν 2 ὃ θεὸς ἐλθεῖν 5 καὶ λαβεῖν αἷμα ἐξ ἀλεκτρυῶνος λευκοῦ μετὰ μέλιτος καὶ κολλύριο[ν] ὁ συν- τρῖψαι καὶ ἐπὶ τρεῖς ἡμέρας ἐπι- χρεῖσαιδ ἐπὶ τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς. καὶ ἀνέβλεψεν ὃ καὶ ἐλήλυθεν ἴ καὶ ndxa-
ἔστησεν ® δημοσίᾳ 9 τῷ θεῷ.10 ρίστησεν " δημοσίᾳ τῷ θεᾷ
To Valerius Aper, ἃ blind soldier, the god revealed ? that he should go% and take blood of a white cock, together with honey, and rub them into an eyesalve * and anoint ὅ his eyes three days. And he received his sight,® and came” and gave thanks 8 publicly ® to the god.1°
the theft of clothing. It is clear that the parable was successful in hitting the popular tone. The papyri and inscriptions furnish good contempgrary illus-
trations of the same kind to other of our Lord’s parables, 6.6. the importunate widow (Luke xviii. 1 ff.) Tauetis of the village of Socnopaei Nesus (Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 522, Fayiim, 2nd century a.p.), or the prodigal son Antonis Longus with his confession of sins to his mother Nilus (Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 846, Fayim, 2nd century a.p.; see below, pp. 187 ff.) and ‘‘ Parable ” in Index IV.
(For notes 1 to ro see next page.
#
136 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
This text is, if possible, even more paratactic (‘‘ Semitic,” people would say, if it were a quotation from the New Testa- ment) than the corresponding passage in St. John.
Most striking of all, however, is the similarity between the utterances of the Johannine Christ in the first person, spoken with the solemnity proper to a cult, and certain ancient examples of the same style as we find it in widespread. use for the purposes of non-Christian and pre-Christian religion. An inscription in honour of Isis at Nysa in “ Arabia,’’ pre- served by Diodorus of Sicily, and an Isis inscription in the island of Ios, may convey to us an impression of this “ cult ”’ style; we hear its echo still in texts of post-Johannine date. In the case of the second inscription there is another 1 of those delightful accidents to be recorded which serve to recompense all who are wearied by the toil of compiling the statistics of language. This inscription, highly important also in respect of its contents, is now in the church of St. John the Divine, Ios, written on a portion of fluted column which now serves to support the altar: St. John the Divine has rescued this venerable document of a prose akin to his own. The first editor of the inscription, R. Weil,? considered it, strangely
1 Cf. p. 103 f. above for the similar preservation of the ἐπισυναγωγή
inscription. 2 Athenische Mitteilungen, 2 (1877) p. 81.
Notes to p. 135 :—
1 Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum, No. 5980,5" = Dittenberger, Sylloge,? No. 807169, (No. 117315,). Apart from the mere words the parallelism is of ~ course remarkable. Similarities both formal and actual occur also in the three other records and in numerous tablets of the same kind from Epidaurus. For a perfectly simple narrative style, consisting almost entirely of participial constructions and sentences connected by καί, cf. the long inscription recording the ‘‘Acts of Heracles,” Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum, No. 5984. The word πράξεις is here used as in the title of St. Luke’s and other ‘ Acts of ‘the Apostles.”
2 So used frequently in the Greek Bible in the sense of divine warning or revelation [e.g. LXX Jer. xxxii. (xxv.) 30, xxxvii. (xxx.) 2, xliii. (xxxvi.) 2, 4; Matt. ii. 12, 22; Luke ii. 26; Acts x. 22; Heb. viii. 5, xi. 7, xii. 25].
3 Corresponding to the direct imperative ‘‘Go” in St. John.
4 Cf. the clay made of earth and spittle in St. John.
> The word is employed exactly as by St. John, who also construes it with ἐπί . (ix. 6). ® Asin St. John.
7 As in John ix. 7. ® As often in the New Testament.
® Asin the Acts [xvi. 37, xviii. 28, xx. 20]. :
10 Cf. the grateful Samaritan, Luke xvii. 15 f.
“
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 137
enough, to be an imperial edict or letter of the period of the Christian persecutions. Its true character was after- wards pointed out to him by Evstratiadis.1 It has re- peatedly engaged the attention of scholars, and has been published by Baron F. Hiller von Gaertringen,? who assigns the writing to the (second or) third century A.D. By his kind agency I am enabled to reproduce here (Figure 17), with the permission of the Epigraphical Commission of the Prussian Academy of Sciences, a carefully prepared facsimile of this uncommonly interesting text by Alfred Schiff. In spite of the late writing the text itself, as shown by the parallel text from Nysa in our pre-Christian authority Diodorus, is old_in the main, and probably much older than the Gospel of St. John.
In order not to break the historical continuity I give first of all the text from Nysa, then that from Ios,’ thirdly a Johan-
1 Athenische Mitteilungen, 2 (1877) p. 189 f.
2 Inscriptiones Graecae, XII. V. 1 No. 14, cf. p. 217; most recently in Dittenberger, Sylloge? No. 1267. For an unimportant new fragment see Bulletin de Correspondance Hellénique, 28 (1904) p. 330. I afterwards dis- covered that Adolf Erman, Die dgyptische Religion, Berlin, 1905, p. 245, also translates the inscription (in part), and takes the same view of itasIdo. It shows, he says, ‘‘ what the more simple souls thought of Isis.”
3 Among pre-Johannine texts we might also mention the “ Praise of Wisdom,” in Ecclesiasticus xxiv., where the first personal pronoun is used at least four times in the solemn manner. This style can undoubtedly be traced still further back: cf. the solemn ‘‘ I am”’ of Jahveh in the Old Testament, and the “1 used by the kings in ancient Oriental inscriptions, an echo of which is found in the late inscription of Silco, a 6th cent. Christian King of Nubia (Dittenberger, Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae, No. 201).. The parataxis in this inscription, which is sufficiently barbaric in other respects, is exactly paralleled in the Isis inscriptions of Nysa and Ios. The best parallels to the use of the first personal pronoun are to be found in Egyptian sacred texts. Cf. for instance the texts in Albrecht Dieterich’s Eine Mithrasliturgie erlauteri, Leipzig, 1903, p. 194 f., and the same scholar’s references to the Ley- den magical papyrus V. in the Jahrbiicher fir classische Philologie herausg. von Alfred Fleckeisen, 16. Supplementband, Leipzig, 1888, p. 773. E.g., in the same papyrus, VII,,, we have ἐγώ εἰμι “Oorpis ὃ καλούμενος ὕδωρ, ἐγώ εἰμι Ἶσις ἡ καλουμένη δρόσος, “1 am Osiris, who am called ‘ Water’; I am Isis, who am called ‘Dew.’’’ Formal and actual parallels are also found in the London magical papyrus No. 462¢ and 1214g¢¢, (Kenyon, I. pp. 72, 100) and particularly in Apuleius, Metamorphoses, 11.5. Further details in Pfister, Wochenschrift f. klass. Philol. 1911, col. 809 f. To one of his references, Acta Thomae (Bonnet) II. 2 p. 148 f., Rostalski (letter, 25 Dec., 1912) adds another, Acta Thomae 11. 2 Ὁ. 271. [M.R. James, The Apocryphal New Testament, Oxford, 1924, pp. 379 f., 434; and cf. pp. 411-415. TrR.] A curious late after-effect of the “1 ’-style is found in the sacred writings of the Yezidis, cf. the Qasidas
138 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
nine text of similar form, and lastly an example of the sacral use of the first person singular that is no doubt later than St. John.
I
Diodorus of Sicily (t 27 B.c.) says in his History } that he was acquainted with writers who had described the tombs of Isis and Osiris at Nysa in ‘“‘ Arabia.’”’2 The tombstone of each deity bore an inscription in “sacred characters,’”’ the greater part of which had been already destroyed by time. The still legible portion of the Isis inscription he gives as follows :—
Ἐγὼ "lots εἰμι ἡ βασίλισσα I am Isis, the queen of every
, , € - ε 4, πάσης χώρας vi] παιδευθεῖσα πὍυπὸο ε a 1 @ Pee) ΄
Ἑρμοῦ, καὶ ὅσα ἐγὼ ἐνομοθέτησα, Ἐγώ
? € μὴ Ἂν , an εἶμι ἡ τοῦ νεωτάτου Κρόνου θεοῦ
οὐδεὶς αὐτὰ δύναται λῦσαι.
Ouyar πρεσβυτάτη. Ἐγώ εἰμι yoTnp πρ μ γ μ γυνὴ καὶ ἀδελφὴ ᾿Οσίριδος βασιλέως.
᾿Εγώ εἰμι ἡ πρώτη καρπὸν ἀνθρώποις
land, taught by Hermes, and whatsoever things I have or- dained, no one is able to loose. them. I am the eldest daugh- ter of Cronos, the youngest god. I am wife and sister of King Osiris. I am the first that devised fruit for men.
I am mother of Horus the
spores: TBS wie μὲ τώρ" Opse eas King. I am she that riseth βασιλέως. ᾿Εγώ εἰμι ἡ ἐν τῷ ἄστρῳ | in the dog-star. For me was τῷ ἐν τῷ κυνὶ ἐτιτέλλουσα. ᾿Βμοὶ | the city of Bubastis built. BovBacros ἡ πόλις φκοδομήθη. | Rejoice, rejoice? Egypt, that
Χαῖρε, χαῖρε Αἴγυπτε ἡ θρέψασά pe. nourished me.
Diodorus also gives a fragment of the Osiris inscription. Like the other it consists of brief statements by Osiris about himself, but the word “1 15 not so conspicuous as in the Isis text.
(‘‘ elegies,’’ long poems) of the Sheikh ‘Adi (12th cent. a.p.) in R. Frank, Scheich ‘Adi, dev gvosse Hetlige dey Jezidis, Diss., Erlangen, 1911, p. 111 ff.— On the whole question the abundant material offered by E. Norden, Agnostos Theos, pp. 186 ff., 207 ff., 220 ff. must now be considered. The great lines are there clearly drawn by the historian of religion.
1 I. 27. I quote from the edition by F. Vogel, Leipzig, 1888.
? This statement must be regarded with suspicion. The text came pro-. bably, as Wilcken conjectures, from Bubastis. Nysa is a fabulous place. (Thanks to Diodorus ‘‘ Nysa’s isle ’’ has left traces in Milton, Paradise Lost, , iv. 275-279, and Wordsworth, the poem called ‘‘ The Brownie’s Cell,” beginning ‘To barren heath.” Tr]
3 Or “ Hail, hail!”
[ ΝΟ BIA KA HEICILEPWEL ANI HT. JoLTIALHEK OR A)
5 ETIAJASZOHNY TOE? LED MOY
ET, PAM AT AE ALTOEAT JO It Γ
10
5 EW
20 CIAEPTAEYPAED WT OA HOA BTW ry NAIKAKAIANAPAC NN
ΕΓΝΓΎΝΑΙΞΙΔΕ KAMHNONBRE POLE ea
NWNIONE! ΓΦΙΛΟΓΤΟΡΓΕ ᾿ ΕΝ ἐς ETATO! CALTOPrOICTONEIEIAIA
TA vs KEIMENOICTEIMWPIANETTEOHKA ETWME ΑΔ ΕΑ ΟΥΟΓΕΙ ΕΟΓΙΑΓΑΝΘΡΗΠο OAT IALETTAYT® ΕΓΝΜΥΗΓΕΙΓΑΝ ΘΝ ΠΟΙΓΑΝΕΔΕΙ ΔΕ ΛΑ ΘΕΙΜΝΤΗΜΆΝΕΔΙΔᾺ ZAET MT EMENHOEWNEIAPYEA ΜῊΝ ET WT YPAN NAPA PACK ATEAYCA ἘΠΥΓΓΕΙ͂ΓΕ vo LOAITNNKALYTTANAPKINHNANK ALD, ETWJOAI KMONEICXY ROTEPON XPY LOY KAIAPLY PIOYETIO! HUD EFLITOAAHOELK AAONENOMOeETHEA NOM IZEZOAIETLIC YN [PAGACTAMIKATEYP., TENE KTOYEEAAHEI KAIBAPR APOILAETOZA
᾿ ane ΤΠ oy KANTO AICXFONAIATEIN WkEL : , ἣ EW oY Oy AEE Oe )
Fic. 17.—Isis Inscription from Ios. Writing of the (2nd or) 3rd cent. A.D. Contents pre-Christian. Now in the church of St. John the Divine, Ios. By permission of the Epigraphical Commission of the Prussian Academy of Sciences. :
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT _ 139 II
That the Nysa inscription was no fiction, but a permanent constituent in liturgical texts of the Isis cult, is proved by the later record from Ios (Fig. 17), which is longer, but in no other respect discordant. I print it here without preserving the original division into lines, only marking (for convenience in referring to the facsimile) the point where every fifth line begins.
[Ὁ δεῖνα ἀνέθηκεν Ἐἤσι[δι Ν. Ν. dedicated this to Isis, Σεράπ]ι [δ]. ᾿Ανούβιδι Κα[ρποκρά]τη. Serapis, Anubis, and Carpo- crates. I am Isis, the mis- hes. : .., , | tress of every land,? and was χόρας καὶ (°) ἐπαιδ[ εὐθην ὑπὸ Ἑρμοῦ taught by Hermes, and devised καὶ γράμματα εὗρον μετὰ Ἑρμοῦ | with Hermes the demotic? τὰ δημόσια, ἵνα μὴ τοῖς αὐτοῖς πάντα letters, that all things might not be written with the same (letters). I gave and ordained laws 4 unto men, which no one δύναται μεταθεῖναι. ᾿Εγώ εἰμι Kpé- | is able to change. I am eldest vou θυγάτηρ πρεσβυτάτη. “᾿Εγώ εἰμι | daughter of Cronos. I am wife and sister of King Osiris. λῶν "Eyed εἶμε θεοῖν Κυμὲς ἄκερῷ I am she that riseth in the star seirtiCASer 18) Wek hae 3 of the Dog god. I am she that ἐπιτέλζλλονσα. (0) Βγώ εἰμι ἦ ᾿ς called goddess by women. παρὰ γυναιξὶ θεὸς καλουμένη.- ᾿Ε[μ]οὲ | For me was the city of Bubastis Βούβαστις πόλις οἰκοδομήθη. Ἐγὼ. built.6 I divided the earth from the heaven. I showed the paths of the stars.? I ordered the course of the sun καὶ σελήνης πορείαν συνέταξα. Ἐγὼ | and moon.® I devised busi- Oardo-(?)ora ἔργα edpa. ᾿Εγὼ τὸ | ness in the sea.® I made
᾽ Fae .» ε , ros Εἶσις ἐγώ 1 εἰμι ἡ τ[ύρανν]ος πάσης
γράφηται. ᾿Εγὼ νόμους ἀνθρώποις
ἐθέμην καὶ ἐνομο-(1θ)θέτησα, ἃ οὐδεὶς μη ΔῸΣ σα,
γυνὴ καὶ ἀδελφὴ Ὀσείρεος βασι-
ἐχώρισα γῆν ἀπ' οὐρανοῦ. Ἐγὼ.
ἄστ[ρ]ων ὁδοὺς ἔδειξα. Ἐγὼ ἡλίου
ΤΊ was at one time not quite sure whether these two words were rightly taken together. The anaphoric ἐγώ in the following lines leads us to expect that the first sentence should also begin with ἐγώ. But the (metrical) Isis inscription from Andros, Inscriptiones Graecae, XII. V. 1, No. 739, of the age of Augustus, also has Ἶσις ἐγώ... several times.
3 Cf. Ecclus. xxiv. 6.
° As distinguished from the hieroglyphics.
4 Cf. the idea of divine legislation in the Old Testament.
® Cf. LXX Psalm cxxi. [cxxii.] 3, 4; Ecclus. xxiv. 11.
® Cf. LXX Gen. i. 7-10.
ΤΟΙ. LXX Gen. i. 16 f.; Job. ix. 7 ff.; xxxviii. 31 f.
5. Cf. LXX Gen. i. 16 f.; Job ix. 7 ff.; xxxviii. 31 1.
® Cf. Wisdom xiv. 3 ff.
140 Ἐγὼ Ἐγὼ
- δίκαϊον ἰσχυρὸν ἐποίησα. γυναῖκα καὶ ἄνδρα συνήγαγα. γυναιξὶ δεκάμηνον βρέφος ἐνέταξα. "Ey ὑπὸ τέκνων γονεῖς φιλοστοργεῖ- σθαι ἐνομοθέτησα. Ἐγὼ τοῖς ἀστόρ- ‘ 5 25 , yous γονεῖσι δια-(Ξ5)κειμένοις τειμω- ρίαν ἐπέθηκα. Ἐγὼ μετὰ τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ ᾿Οσείρεος τὰς ἀνθρωποφα- , Μ 3 Ν ΄ + 4 ylas ἔπαυσα. Ἐγὼ μυήσεις ἀνθρώ- ποις ἀνέδειξα. τειμᾶν ἐδίδαξα. Ἐγὼ τεμένη θεῶν εἱδρυσάμην. ΄ ᾿Εγὼ τυράννω[ν] ἀρχὰς
κατέλυσα. ᾿Εγὼ στέργε-(ϑ)σθαι
Ἐγὼ
γυναῖκας ὑπ’ ἀνδρῶν ἠνάνκασα.
τὸ δίκαιον εἰσχυρότερον χρυσίου καὶ |
ἀργυρίου ἐποίησα. ᾿Εγὼ τὸ ἀληθὲς
καλὸν ἑνομοθέτησα νομίζ[εσ]θαι. Ἐγὼ συνγραφὰς γαμικὰΪ-ς] Ἕλλησι
Ἐγὼ τὸ
εὗἷρα. ᾿Ἐγὼ [δ]ιαλέκτους καὶ βαρβάροις διεταξά-(3ὅ)μην. καλὸν καὶ τὸ αἰσχρὸν διαγεινώσκεσθαι [ὑπ]ὸ τῆς φύσεως ἐποίησα. “Ἐγὼ ὅρκου φόβον 12 [ἐπέβαλο]ν ἐπ[ὶ΄. ..
Jv ἀδίκως ey (Or eo) .
Ἐγὼ ἀγάλματα θεῶν ©
‘the gods.
LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
strong the right.1 I brought together woman and man.? I appointed unto women the new-born babe in the tenth month? 1 ordained that parents should be loved by children. I laid punishment upon those disposed ‘without natural affection towards their | parents.® I made. with my brother Osiris an end of the eating of men.® I showed mysteries unto men. I taught to honour images of the gods. I consecrated the precincts of I broke down the governments of tyrants.’ I compelled women to be loved by men. I made the right to be stronger than gold and silver.® I ordained that the
| true should be thought good.
I devised marriage contracts.!° I assigned to Greeks and bar- ° barians their languages! I made the beautiful and the ill- favoured to be distinguished by
nature. I laid (?) fear (?) of an oath upon... un- justly...
It may seem surprising that in this case of.a religious text of really Egyptian origin the parallels I have given (in the footnotes) are taken from the Septuagint and not from other
Egyptian texts.
1 Cf. LXX Psalm xxxvi.[xxxvii.] 17, 39. 4 Cf. LXX Exod. xx. 12;
3 Cf. Wisdom vii. 1, 2. 5 Cf. Exod. xxi. 15, 16, etc.
But there is good reason for this: in
2 Cf. LXX Gen. i. 28, ii. 22. Deut. v. 16, etc. ® Cf, Wisdom xii. 3-5.
7 Cf. LXX Psalm cxxxiv. [cxxxv.] το, 11; cxxxv. [cxxxv.] aie
8 Cf. LXX Gen. ii. 24;
Mal. ii. 15, 16.
9 Cf. LXX Psalm xxxvi. [xxxvii.] 16; cxviii. [cxix.] 127. 10 Cf, LX X Mal. ii. 14; (Tobit vii. 14.)
11 Cf. LXX Gen. xi. 7, 9
13 It would have been easy to find them there.
12 φόβον is more likely than φόρον. Cf. for instance O. Gruppe,
Griechische Mythologie und Religionsgeschichte II., Miinchen, 1906, p. 1563 ff.
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 141
anticipation of the problem which will engage our attention in. Chapter IV. I was anxious te show how close the resemblance can be between the Hellenised Old Testament and Hellenised Egyptian religion. The actual relationship of ideas being so close, how easy must it have been for Hellenistic Judaism and Christianity to adopt the remarkable and simple style of expression in the first person singular.?
ΠῚ John x. 7-14 :--
Ἐγώ εἰμι ἡ θύρα τῶν προβάτων. I am the door of the sheep. πάντες ὅσοι ἦλθον πρὸ ἐμοῦ κλέπται All that came before Me are thievés and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. Iam the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and go out, and shall ἐξελεύσεται καὶ νομὴν εὑρήσει. ‘O.| find pasture. The thief cometh κλέπτης οὐκ ἔρχεται εἰ μὴ ἵνα κλέψῃ | not, but that he may steal, καὶ θύσῃ καὶ ἀπολέσῃ. ᾿Εγὼ ἦλθον | and kill, and destroy: I came that they may have life, and may have abundance. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd layeth down His life for the sheep. He that is a μισθωτὸς καὶ οὐκ ὧν ποιμήν, ob | hireling, and not a shepherd, οὐκ ἔστιν τὰ πρόβατα ἴδια, θεωρεῖ whose own the sheep are not, τὸν λύκον ἐρχόμενον καὶ ἀφίησιν beholdeth the wolf coming, τὰ πρόβατα καὶ φεύγει (καὶ ὁ λύκος and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth (and the wolf snatcheth and scattereth them), because he is a hireling, and careth not : for the sheep. I am the good ποιμὴν ὃ Kahds, - shepherd.: (R.V., adapted.)
a —A wonderful example of the worshippers’ congregational prayer with Thou in answer to the liturgical epiphany of the divinity with J is the prayer to Isis in the Oxyrhynchus Papyri XI. No. 1380 (written early in the 2nd cent. A.D.). It isa very mine of discovery for researchers studying the great epoch of religious change.
1 At Ephesus, to which the Johannine texts point, there was a cult of Isis.—In the inscription in Ancient Greek Inscriptions in the British Museum, III. No. 722, the reading Eiceov does not seem to me to be certain, but there are other sure epigraphical proofs elsewhere. Cf. Adolfus Rusch, De Serapide et Iside in Graecia cultis, Diss., Berolini, 1906, p. 72 f.
εἰσὶν καὶ λῃσταί, ἀλλ' οὐκ ἤκουσαν αὐτῶν τὰ πρόβατα. ᾿Εγώ εἰμι ἡ θύρα: δ ἐμοῦ ἐάν τις εἰσέλθῃ,
, ν > , ν σωθήσεται, και εἰσελεύσεται και'
LA νΝ wy Ν x a
iva ζωὴν ἔχωσιν καὶ περισσὸν ἔχωσιν.
Ἐγώ εἰμι ὁ ποιμὴν ὁ καλός’ ὁ he « μ᾿ x ἧς = ~
ποιμὴν ὃ καλὸς τὴν ψυχὴν αὐτοῦ
* 4 € τίθησιν ὑπὲρ τῶν προβάτων. ‘O
ἁρπάζει αὐτὰ καὶ σκορπίζει) "΄ ὅτι ἡδ > x > , ; ee ae μισθωτός ἐστιν καὶ οὐ μέλει αὐτῷ
Ἴ
περὶ τῶν προβάτων. Ἐγώ εἶμι ὃ
142 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
IV
In spite of distortion caused by the would-be wizardry the features of the old style are recognisable in the following passage from the London magical papyrus No. 46454, which was written in the 4th century 4.0. Similar examples would not be difficult to find in other magical texts.?
Ἐγώ εἰμι ὃ ἀκέφαλος δαίμων, ἐν I am the headless 8 daemon, having eyes in my feet, the πον σὰ: es ake im, >. «| Strong one, the deathless fire. τὸ πῦρ TO ἀθάνατον. Ἐγώ εἰμι ἢ I am the truth, who hateth ἀλήθεια ὃ μεισῶν ἀδικήματα γείνεσθαι that evil deeds are in the ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ. ᾿Εγώ εἰμι ὁ ἀστράπτων | world. I am he that lighteneth [here follow certain magic words] and thundereth. I am _ he whose sweat is a shower falling ὁ ἱδρὼς ὄμβρος ἐπιπείπτων ἐπὶ τὴν | upon the earth to make it γῆν ἵνα ὀχεύῃ. ᾿Εγώ εἰμι οὗ τὸ fruitful. I am he whose mouth burneth altogether. I am he . PARE Oe . w«, , | that begetteth and begetteth ὁ γεννῶν καὶ ἀπογεννῶν. ‘Eye εἰμι again. I am the grace of the
ἡ χάρις τοῦ αἰῶνος. aeon.
- ἢ ὧδ \ ὧν ? Pow τοις ποσιν EXWVY Τὴν ορᾶσιν, ἰσχυρὸς,
[magic words inserted here]
καὶ βροντῶν. ᾿Εγώ εἰμι οὗ ἐστὶν
στόμα καίεται δι’ dAov. Ἐγώ εἰμι
The entire simplicity of the style of this solemn monotone is seen all the more clearly if we compare it with metrical paraphrases. This we can do inthe case both of the Isis inscription and of the Johannine texts. There is an in- scription of the age of Augustus in the island of Andros, consisting of a hymn to Isis in hexameters, and based evi- dently on the old formulae known to us from the inscriptions of Nysa and Ios. For comparison with the Gospel of St.
1 Greek Papyvi in the British Museum, ed. F. G. Kenyon, I. p. 69 f.
2 It was part of the proper procedure in ancient sorcery for the enchanter to identify himself with powerful and terrible deities in order to impress the demons who were to be overcome. Cf. Bibelstudien, p.271; Bible Studies, PP. 355, 360. ς
5 Cf. Franz Boll, Sphaeva: Neue griechische Texte and Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der Sternbilder, Leipzig, 1903, pp. 221 f., 433, 438.
* Hermann Diels (letter, Berlin W., 22 July, 1908) considers it possible that the verb here means destroy. (So also the new edition of Liddell and Scott, 1926. TR.]
5 Epigrammata Graeca, ed. G. Kaibel, No. 1028; most recently in the Inscriptiones Graecae, XII. V. 1, No. 739.
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 143
John we have the pompous hexameters of Nonnus. Con- trasted with their originals these verses sound something like the rhyming paraphrase of the Psalms by Dr. Am- brosius Lobwasser (anglice Praisewater), Professor of Law and Assessor to the Royal Court of Justice at Kénigsberg, achieved
in 1573.
“ Zu Gott wir unser Zuflucht haben, Wann uns schon Ungliick thut antraben ’᾿---
so the good man begins the Psalm? out of which Luther had quarried the granite for his ‘‘ Feste Burg.’’ The “watered praises ’’ of Lobwasser’s Psalter are about equal in . merit, perhaps even superior, to the hexameters into which Nonnus ? and the author of the Andros hymn diluted the old lines couched in homely, vigorous “I ’’-style.
4. From whatever side the New Testament may be regarded by the Greek scholar, the verdict of historical philology, based on the contemporary texts of the world surrounding the New Testament, will never waver. For the most part, the pages of our sacred Book are so many records of popular Greek, in its various grades; taken as a whole the New Testament is a Book of the people. Therefore we say that Luther, in taking the New Testament from the doctors and presenting it to the people, was only giving back to the people their own. We enter, perhaps, an attic-room in one of our large cities, and if we find there some poor old body reading her Testa- ment beside the few fuchsias and geraniums on the window- sill, then we feel that the old Book is in a position to which its very nature entitles it. Think too of the Japanese New Testament found by a Red Cross sister in a wounded man’s knapsack during the war between Russia and Japan: that was also a grateful resting-place for the old Book. We will go further, and say: this great Book of the people ought
1 [Psalm xlvi. Lobwasser might be thus imitated: “Τὸ God for refuge each one flieth When to o’erride us trouble trieth.” ' Luther’s celebrated “ Ein’ feste Burg ist unser Gott " is best represented in Carlyle’s version, “‘ A safe stronghold our God is still, A trusty shield and weapon,” etc. ΤᾺ.
2 Tycho Mommsen long ago, with fine appreciation of St. John, pronounced judgment against Nonnus (Bettvdge zu der Lehve von den griechischen Pra- positionen, 2. und 3. Heft, Frankfurt a. M., 1887, p. 254).
144 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
really never to be published in sumptuous editions with costly engravings and expensive binding. The Egyptian potsherds with Gospel fragments,! the Paternoster from Megara,’ the Biblia Pauperum 58 and the Stuttgart Groschenbibél,* are in their externals more in keeping with the character of the New Testament than modern éditions de luxe bought by rich German godfathers for Confirmation presents. The plainer the cover, the more modest the type, the coarser the paper, the nearer the pictures come to the style of Diirer or Rem- brandt, the more fitly will the great Book of the people be arrayed.
The Book of the people has become, in the course of cen- turies the Book of all mankind. At the present day no book in the world is printed so often and-in so many languages as the New Testament.® From the people to mankind at large : historical philology establishes the causal connexion under- lying this development. The New Testament was not a product of the colourless refinement of an upper class that had nothing left to hope for, whose classical period lay, irre- trievable, in the past. On the contrary, it was, humanly speaking, a product of the force that came unimpaired, and strengthened by the Divine Presence, from the lower class (Matt. xi. 25 f.; τ Cor. i. 26-31). This reason alone enabled it to become the Book of all mankind.
And so the simple texts on stone, papyrus, and earthenware have helped us, firstly, to a knowledge of the sacred Volume
1 Cf. above, pp.. 57-60.
2 Cf. above, p. 56, n. 3.
3 My friend Carl Neumann, the art-critic, in a latter dated Kiel, 17 May, 1908, objects to this estimate of the Biblia Pauperum. [No doubt the author was thinking not so much of the actual artistic merit or cost of production of the block-books and their MS. predecessors, as of the contrast between them and elaborately written (and illuminated) complete Bibles of the same date or earlier. TR.] ;
‘ Cf. my article on the Groschenbibel in Die Hilfe, 1898, No. 16. [On the publication of the first German ‘“ penny Testament” by the Wiirttemberg Bible Institute, following the example of the British and Foreign Bible Society. TR.) ‘
5 The British and Foreign Bible Society alone had, down to June 1925, printed the whole or portions of the New Testament in 576 languages. See specimens of all these translations in The Gospel in Many Tongues, published by the Society, London, 1925—an impressive little book despite its small size. [The Rev. R. Kilgour, Superintendent of the translating and editorial department, kindly gave me the latest figures, as above, in Feb., 1926. TR.)
LANGUAGE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT — 145
on its linguistic side, and then, by that means, to no small understanding of its most. distinguishing characteristic. A new ray of light falls on its history among the nations.} The New Testament has become the Book of the Peoples because it began by being the Book of the People.
1 On this subject cf. my little work, Die Urgeschichte des Christentums im Lichte der Sprachforschung, Tiibingen, 1910.
CHAPTER III
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE, ILLUSTRATED BY THE NEW TEXTS
I. Our estimate of the New Testament will be much the same as we have just stated if we now approach it from the point of view of literary history. Here again it is the records of the world contemporary with the New Testament that have supplied us with the right standard of criticism.
In saying this we may seem at first to be preparing diffi- culties for ourselves. We have insisted more than once that the records referred to are to a great extent non-literary, yet now we claim that they throw light on literary questions. This seems to be self-contradictory; and I can well imagine that some readers will be astonished to hear me say that these poor scraps of papyrus, or potsherds inscribed with fragments of letters from unknown Egyptians, have taught me to under- stand the true nature of St. Paul’s Epistles and, ultimately, the course by which Primitive Christianity developed on the literary side. But I'ask the incredulous to give me a patient hearing.?
The mention of the literary side of Primitive Christianity brings us to a branch of inquiry the importance of which
1 For what follows cf. the ‘‘ Prolegomena td the Biblical Letters and Epistles ”’ in Bibelstudien, 1895, pp. 187-252 [Bible Studies, pp. 1-59], and the article ‘‘ Epistolary Literature’ in the Encyclopaedia Biblica, II., London, 1901, col. 1323 ff.; also the outline in Beitydge zur Weiteventwicklung der christlichen Religion, Minchen, 1905, p. 119 ff. These sources have been made occasional use of here.—K. Dziatzko, article ‘‘ Brief ’’ in Pauly’s Real- Encyclopadte dev classischen Altertumswissenschaft, new edition by G. Wissowa, III., Stuttgart, 1899, col. 836 ff., takes the same view as regards the main questions. Cf. also R. Ὁ, Kukula, Briefe des jiingeren Plinius*, Leipzig, 1909, and the literature there quoted. Criticisms of my theory in P. Wendland, Die urchristlichen Literaturformen?'’, Tibingen, 1912 (Handbuch zum N.T. I. 3); Joh. Weiss, art. ‘‘ Literaturgeschichte des N.T.,” in the encyclopaedic work Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart; V. Hepp, De vorm der nieuw-testamentische brieven volgen Deissmann en zijn school, Gereformeerd Theologisch Tijdschrift, March and April 1916.
146
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 147
is still all too little recognised. Whole libraries, it is true, have been written concerning the growth of the New Testa- ment and the origin of its several parts, but the fact remains that it has not yet sufficiently been viewed, as the literary historian would view it, in relation to the history of ancient literature. Formerly none but a few scholars felt the need of studying Primitive Christianity with the strictness of the literary historian. Then came Franz Overbeck, whose im- portant study ‘‘ On the Beginnings of Patristic Literature,” 1 published in 1882, proved extremely stimulating. But even to-day there are many who fail to treat this whole problem as it should be treated, viz. by a strict application of principle. People approach the New Testament with the preconceived idea that the Primitive Christian texts which owe their preservation to their inclusion in that book were themselves without exception “ books ’’ and works of literature.
But this preconceived idea must be given up. If we were to regard the New Testament merely as an assemblage of little works of literature and treat it accordingly in our studies, we should commit the same mistake as an art-critic who proposed to treat a collection of fossils and ancient sculpture as if it contained nothing but works of art. We must not assume that the New Testament is literature from cover to
! Historische Zeitschrift, 48, New Series 12 (1882) p. 429 ff. Views have been expressed on the problem by Heinrici (Das Neue Testament und die urchvistliche Uberlieferung; Theol. Abhandlungen C. Weizsaecker gewidmet, Freiburg i. B., 1892, pp. 321-352; Die Entstehung des Neuen Testaments, Leipzig, 1899; Der literavische Charakter der neutestamentlichen Schriften, Leipzig, 1908) and Gustav Kriiger (Die Entstehung des Neuen Testaments,? Freiburg i. B. u. Leipzig, 1896; Das Dogma vom Neuen Testament, Giessen, 1896). After them Wendland in his work, Die urchristlichen Litevaturformen ; cf. also M. Albertz, Ev. Kirchenblatt fiir Schlesien 24 (1921) p. 326 ff. Valu- able with respect to method in dealing with. the problem of the Epistles : H. Jordan, Geschichte dey altchvistlichen Literatur, Leipzig, 1911, p. 123 ff. Indirectly instructive: G. Misch, Geschichte dey Autobiographie I., Leipzig, 1907. In recent discussions concerning genre-research the questions raised by Overbeck and by my Bible Studies should not have been ignored. My study of a genve that appeared in 1895 certainly did not receive its “impulse” from Gunkel {as Windisch, Theologisch Tijdschrift 1919, p. 371, seems to assume). The actual impulse came to me rather curiously on a carriage drive, I think in 1893, when I suddenly caught the word “ epistolography,” without any context, let fall by a South German friend who was riding on the
box.
148 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
cover. Whether it began as literature in its single parts is a question to be inquired about. The inquiry resolves itself into these questions: Did Primitive Christianity begin by being literary? When did it become so? What were the stages it went through in the process ?
2. These questions, I think, have more than a purely academic interest : they contribute to a thorough apprecia- tion of what Primitive Christianity really was. But in order to answer them we must come to an understanding about the meaning of our term “ literature ’’ and about the various forms in which literature may find expression.
The service here rendered us by the inscriptions, papyri, and ostraca is incalculable. Being themselves non-literary texts they teach us—what was to be seen even without their aid—that a thing is not necessarily literature because it has been committed to writing and preserved in written form. Being also popular texts they accustom us, when we come to literature, to distinguish the popular from the artistic.
What then is literature? Literature is something written for the public (or at least for a public) and cast in a definite artistic form.
A man, however, who draws up a lease or an application to some public official, or who writes a receipt or a letter is not engaged in literature. Lease, application, receipt, letter, and a host of similar documents, are non-literary. They are the products not of art but of life; their destiny is not for the public and posterity but for the passing moment in a workaday world. This it is that makes the host of non-literary texts, on stone, papyrus, or pottery, such delightful reading. In large measure they are records of life, not works of art : records testifying of work, joy, and sorrow, and never intended for us, though a bountiful fate, willing that we after-comers should enter into pure human contact with the past, has made them ours.
There is one special class of these records of human life and work which the new discoveries have brought to light again in astonishing plenty and most delightful freshness. These are ancient non-literary letters, exchanged by private
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE τ49
persons on terms of intimacy, and preserved not in late copies but in their originals, on lead, papyrus, parchment,} or earthenware fragment. What would have been im- possible in the seventies and eighties of the last century is possible now, and a history of ancient letter-writing might be written. Conceived most comprehensively, it would cover a period of several thousand years; restricted to ancient letter-writing in Greek and Latin it would yet run to more than one thousand.?
To think of “literature” or to speak of “ epistolary literature’ in connexion with these hundreds of ancient original letters would be utterly perverse 8 (or only possible if we were to employ the word “ literature ” in a secondary and colourless. sense with regard to non-literary writing). The epistolary literature of antiquity is something altogether different. That is represented by the literary letter, the artistic letter, the epistle,4 of which we shall have to speak later on. On the contrary, we must banish all thought of literature, of conscious artistic prose, when we turn the pages of the letters that have come down to us. They are texts from which we can learn what is non-literary and pre-literary. And that is precisely what we must learn if we are to under- stand the New Testament historically.
c
3. Let us then from this abundance select a few specimens characteristic of the thousand years between Alexander the Great and Mohammed, beginning with the oldest Greek letter in existence and coming down to the letters of Egyptian Christians in the time before Islam.
The little collection 5 will make admirably clear to us the
1 Letters of the ancient period on parchment are certainly very rare. I know only the letter of Soéris in the Papyri Iandanae ΤΊ (Lipsiae, 1913) No. 12.
® For long periods of the history of other peoples such documents are practi- cally non-existent. In that case every chance find is therefore valuable; cf. for instance Jiidische Privatbriefe aus dem Jahre 1619, herausg. von A. Landau und B. Wachstein, Wien, 1910.
5 R. Reitzenstein, Hellenistische Wundererzahlungen, Leipzig, 1906, p. 98 £., protests, with great justice, against the vagueness of the modern terms em- ployed to discriminate between literary genres.
4 I employ this word technically to distinguish the artistic letter from the real letter. See p. 229.
5 Cf. also the collection of letters in Bibelstudien, p. 208 ff. (a different selection in Bible Studies, p. 21 ff.); Paul Viereck, Aus der hinterlassenen
150. ὃ LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
essential nature of the letter and the forms it assumed in antiquity. The illustrations will give some idea of the inimitable individuality of each single original. We should give a false picture if we selected only the choicest specimens, so we have been careful to include some unimportant examples of average letters.
The collection has moreover a secondary purpose, as will appear in the fourth chapter. It is to bring home to us certain types of the ancient soul. :
I Letter from Mnesiergus, an Athenian, to his housemates, beginning of the 4th century B.c., leaden tablet from Chaidari, near Athens, now in the Berlin Museum, discovered by R. Wiinsch,
. deciphered by him and A. Wilhelm (Figures 18 and 19).
This letter is the oldest Greek letter hitherto known, and of the greatest importance especially for the history of epistolary forms. We are indebted for this valuable specimen to the careful labours of Richard Wiinsch!; it was defi- nitively deciphered and explained in masterly fashion by Adolf Wilhelm.2, By permission of the Austrian Archaeo-
Privatkorrespondenz der alten Agypter, Vossische Zeitung, 3 January, 1895 first supplement; Erman and Krebs, Aus den Papyrus dev Kéniglichen Museen, p. 209 ff. (also 90 ff., etc); R. Cagnat, Indiscrétions archéologiques sur les Egyptiens de l’époque romaine, Comptes rendus de 1’Académie des Inscrip- tions et Belles-Lettres, 1901, p. 784 ff.; Léon Lafoscade, De epistulis (alitsque titulis) imperatorum magistvatuumque Romanorum quas ab aetate Augusti usque ad Constantinum Gyraece scriptas lapides papyvive servaverunt, Thesis, Paris, 1902; Friedrich Preisigke, Familienbriefe aus alter Zeit, Preussische Jahrbicher, 108 (April to June 1902) p. 88 ff.; E. Breccia, Spigolature papi- racee, Atene e Roma, 5 (1902) col. 575 ff.; Epistulae privatae Graecae quae in papyris aetatis Lagidarum servantur, ed. Stanislaus Witkowski, Lipsiae, 1907+ £1911; Milligan, Selections; Helbing, Auswahl; Laudien, Griech. Papyrt; Wilcken, Chrestomathie; especially too the choice little work of Wilhelm Schubart, Ein Jahvtausend am Nil. Briefe aus dem Altertum, verdeutscht und erklavt, Berlin, 1912; G. Ghedini, Letteve Cristiane dai papiri greci del IITe IV secolo, Milano, 1923; F. X. J. Exler, The Form of the Ancient Greek Letter : a Study in Greek Epistolography, Washington, D.C., Catholic University of America, 1923.
1 Inscriptiones Graecae, III. Pars III. Appendix inscriptionum Atticarum : defixionum tabellae in Attica regione repertae, 1897, p. ii. f.
4 Jahreshefte des Osterreichischen Archdologischen Institutes in Wien, 7° (1904) p. 94 ff. Cf. also W. Crénert, Rheinisches Museum 65 (1910) p. 157£.; Witkowski? p. 135 f.; Schubart, Ein Jahvtausend p. 31 f.; and Dittenberger, Sylloge 1118 No. 1259 (Ziebarth), where, however, ἐπέστελε should be read in 1. 2.
Fig. 18. Pre: 19.
The Oldest Greek Letter yet discovered, Address (Fig. 18) and Text (Fig. 19): Mnesiergus of Athens to his Housemates. Leaden tablet, 4th cent. B.c. Now in the Berlin Museum, By permission of the Austrian Archaeological Institute.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS ΤΙΤΕΒΑΤΌΚΕ- 151
logical Institute I am enabled to reproduce ‘here from its publications a facsimile of the same size as the original. The tablet was originally folded together and perhaps fastened with string and seal. On the outside of the tablet is the
address (Figure 18), which was written after the lead had been folded :—
Bépev! is τὸν κέραμ- To be taken to the potter's ov τὸγ χυτρικόν᾽ working-house ; 3 to be delivered drodévatt δὲ Ναυσίαι to Nausias or to Thrasycles or - ἢ Θρασυκλῆι ἢ θ᾽ διῶι. to his son.
On the inside, and with the lines running in the opposite direction, is the praescript ? and the text of the letter proper (Figure 19). It seems that Mnesiergus was in the country and had probably been surprised by a sudden frost :—
Μνησίεργος Mnesiergus sendeth to them ἐπέστελε τοῖς οἴκοι | that are at his house greeting χαίρεν καὶ ὑγιαίνεν 4 and health and he saith it is καὶ αὐτὸς οὕτως ἔφασ[κ]ε [ἔχεν]. | so with him. (5) If® ye be 5 στέγασμα > τι βόλεστε willing, send me some covering, ἀποπέμψαι ἢ das ἢ διφθέρας either sheepskins or ροδίϑκίηβ, ὡς εὐτελεστάζτα)ς καὶ py | as plain as ye have, and not σισυρωτὰς ᾿ broidered with fur, and shoe-
καὶ κατύματα' τυχὸν ὃ ἀποδώσω. | soles: upon occasion I will
return them.
1 On the infinitive absolute cf. p. 80, n. 4 above.
2 So Crénert and Ziebarth, who have more to say about the persons men- tioned.
3 In the commentaries on the letters of St. Paul the praescript which serves as introduction to the body of the letter is generally spoken of as the address. That is not correct : the address, as shown by this letter, the oldest that has come down to us, was written on the outside or on the cover of the folded letter, and in St. Paul’s case was no doubt much shorter than the praescript. Not one of St. Paul’s letters preserves it. —On the ancient form of praescript used in this letter (and on the praescripts generally) cf. Gustav Adolf Gerhard, Untersuchungen zur Geschichte des griechischen Briefes. Erstes Heft, Die Anfangsformel, Diss. Heidelberg, Tiibingen, 1903, p. 32.
4 These two verbs occur in salutations in 2 Macc. i. 10, ix. 19.
5 The sentence with εἰ is probably not, as Wilhelm supposes, the protasis to the concluding words, τυχὸν ἀποδώσω, but a request made into an independent sentence by aposiopesis, as vivid and colloquial as the well authenticated request in Luke xxii. 42, Πάτερ, εἰ βούλει παρενέγκαι͵ τοῦτο τὸ ποτήριον ἀπ᾽ ἐμοῦ, ‘Father, if Thou wouldest remove this cup from Me!” [Professor Deiss- mann, it will be observed, deletes the comma before remove. It seems possible
{For continuation of notes see next page.
152 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
The contents of this letter, the earliest that we possess, are not particularly striking, it is true; but whoever thinks them trivial must also regard as trivial St. Paul’s request for the cloak that he left at Troas with Carpus (2 Tim. iv. 13).
2
Letter from Zoilus, a servant of Sarapis, to Apollonius, an Egyptian minister of finance, Alexandria, 258-257 B.C., papyrus from the correspondence of Zeno, found at Philadelphia (Fayim), now in the Cairo Museum, edited by G. Vitelli? (Figures 20 and 21).
᾿Απολλωνίωι 3 χαίρειν Ζωίλος ᾿Αφτέν[δ]ιος τ[ῶν ..... eee eee ees Pel
ὃς καὶ διασυνεστάθη ἃ σοι ὑπὸ τῶν τοῦ βασιλέως Pidwv.® ἐμοὶ συμβέβηκεν
θεραπεύοντι τὸν θεὸν Σάραπιν περὶ τῆς σῆς ὑγιείας καὶ εὐ[ηἹμερίᾳς τῆς
πρὸς top βασιλέα Πτολεμαῖον τὸν Σάραπίμ μοι χρημα[τίζει]ν τλε- [ον]φε[]:
1 There is at Petrograd another letter on lead of the 4th cent. B.c., found at Olbia, of similar contents. The text is given by Crénert, Rheinisches Museum 65 (1910) p. 158 ff., and Dittenberger, Sylloge 1118 No. 1260.
2 Pubblicazioni della Societa Italiana per la ricerca det Papiri grect ὁ latini in Egitto : Papiri greci e latini [= P.S.1.], Vol. IV, Firenze, 1917, No. 435. Cf. the important new reading by C. C. Edgar, Annales du Service des Antiquités de l’Egypte, t. 18, No. 7, p. 173 ff., and the review by Wilcken, Archiv f. Papyrusforschung 6, p. 394f. Jam indebted to Wilcken for kindly enlighten- ment concerning the text, and for a translation which has been of great service to me.
9 On the respectful prefixing of the name of the addressee, cf. Bibelstudien, Ῥ. 209 (not in Bible Studies).
4 For διασυνεστάθην.
5 On this court title see Bibelstudien, p. 159 ff., Bible Studies, Ὁ. 167 ff.
§ Wilcken thinks it a case of “ incubation ’’"—that Zoilus had slept in the temple for the purpose of obtaining an oracular dream. For the expression cf. LXX Judith xi. 17, θεραπεύουσα νυκτὸς καὶ ἡμέρας τὸν θεὸν τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, ‘* serving the God of heaven day and night.”
Continuation of notes to page 151 :— ; however, without assuming an aposiopesis, to take παρενέγκαι or ἀποπέμψαι as an infinitive absolute = imperative (cf. φέρεν, dwodévar in the address of this letter), and to regard it as the apodosis. I have therefore ventured to har- monise the translation of the letter with the A.V. and R.V. of Luke xxii. 42. TR.
* This brief colloquial use of τυχόν, for which there are other examples, occurs also in 1 Cor. xvi. 6, with the meaning “ it may be.”
7 {So Deissmann, according to Wilhelm’s interpretation. It would also seem possible to translate : ‘' either sheepskins or leathern garments, be they never so shabby and with no more haironthem.” Tr.]
Fic. 20.—Letter from Zoilus, a servant of Sarapis, to Apollonius, an Egyptian minister of finance, Alexandria, 258-257 B.c. Papyrus from Philadelphia (Faytim). Size of the original, 30 % 31°5 centimetres. Now in the Cairo Museum. Facsimile kindly obtained by C. C. Edgar.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 153
5 ἐν τοῖς ὕπνοις, ὅπως ἂν διαπλεύσω πρὸς σὲ καὶ ἐμ[φανίσω σοι τοῦτ]. [ν]
τὸ[ν] ΄ ᾿
χρηματισμόν, ὅτι δεῖ συντελεσθῆναι αὐτ[ῶι ὑπὸ σοῦ Σαραπιεῖόν τε] 3
καὶ τέμενος ἐν τῆι Ἑλληνικῆι πρὸς τῶι λιμέν[ι] κα[ὶ] ἱ[ερέα] ἐπιστατεῖν κ[αὴ
ἐπιβωμίζειν ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν.3 ἐμοῦ δὲ π[α]ρ[ακαλέσαντος τὸν θεὸν Σάραπιν,
ὅπως ἄμ με παραλύσηι τοῦ ἐνταῦθᾳ [ἔργο]ν, εἰς ἀρρῳσ[τ]ίᾳ[ν] ple πε]ριέβᾳλεν
4
IO μεγάλην ὥστε καὶ κινδυνεῦσᾳί [με]. προσευξάμενος δ] αὐΓτῶι, 31.7 ‘lo μὴ ,ὔ ὑγιάσηι, διότι ὑπομενῶ ὅ τὴν ληιτο[υργ]ίαν καὶ ποιή[σει]ν τὸ ὑφ᾽ αὑτοῦ προστασσόμενον. ἐπεὶ δὲ τάχιστα ὑγιάσθην, παρεγένετό τις ἐκ Κνίδου, ὃς ἐνεχείρησεν οἰκοδομεῖν Σαραπιεῖον ἐν τῶι τόπωι τούτωι καὶ προσ- , 4 .2 δὲ ὅπεϊ a a x NS > n 24 αγηγόχει λίθους" ὕστερον δὲ ἀπεῖπεν αὐτῶι ὁ θεὸς μὴ οἰκοδομεῖν κἀκεῖνος I5 ἀπηλλάγη. ἐμοῦ δὲ παραγενομένου εἰς ᾿Αλεξάνδρειαν καὶ ὀκνοῦντός σοι περὶ τούτων ἐντυχεῖν," ἀλλὰ περὶ πραγματείας ἧς καὶ ὡμολογήκεις μοι, ΄ ε , a , 5 ὃ ,.. ὁ κα , “22 πάλιν ὑπετροπάσθην μῆνας τέσσερας" διὸ οὐκ ἠδυνάμην εὐθέως παραγε- “ > an a νέσθαι πρὸς σέ. καλῶς οὖν ἔχει, ᾿Απολλώνιε, ἐπακολουθῆσαί σε τοῖς ὑπὸ τοῦ 6 - te μὲ a > ir. , 7 ε t ς “ -“ εοῦ προστάγμασιν, ὅπως ἂν εὐίλατός ἴ σοι ὑπάρχων ὃ Σάραπις πολλῶι σε , N rn a Vos ΄ Η͂ a a , ε , 20 μείζω παρὰ τῶι βασιλεῖ καὶ ἐνδοξότερον μετὰ τῆς τοῦ σώματος ὑγιείας σὺ οὖν ποιήσηι. μὴ καταπλαγῆις [[.]] τὸ ἀνήλωμα ὡς ἀπὸ μεγάλης σοι δαπάνης 2 , 8 ἀλλ᾽ Z ὁ πὸ rene X dod 4 ᾿ς ΩΣ ἐσομένης, ἀλλ᾽ ἔσται σοι ἀπὸ πάνυ λυσιτελοῦντος *. συνεπιστατήσω 9 γὰρ ἐγὼ πᾶσι τούτοις.
a εὐτυχεῖ.
1 Used of the responsum divinum, as in Rom. xi. 4 and elsewhere frequently.
2 A convincing restoration of Wilcken’s. I think that instead of αὐτ[ῶι ἡ we might read αὐτόθι, ‘‘ here.” τ
8 The sacrifices would be for Apollonius as founder, xriorys™(Wilcken).
‘ This (or some other similar) restoration seems to me to be necessary, because the subject of the following sentences can only be Sarapis, and must therefore be named beforehand. παρακαλεῖν is the technical term, 2 Cor. xii. 8; cf. the prayer of M. Julius Apellas, p. 308 below.
5 Wilcken rightly makes the accent perispomenon.
® Cf. Bibelstudien, p. 118, Bible Studies, p. 121 f.
7 Cf. Bibelstudien, p. 119, Neue Bibelstudien, Ὁ. 86, Bible Studies, p.122. The examples could be greatly increased.
8 For ἐσόμενον (Wilcken).
® Cf. 1 Esdras vii.z. The governor of Coelesyria and Phoenicia and others, carrying out the command of Darius to rebuild the temple at Jerusalem, ‘‘ did very carefully oversee the holy works, assisting the elders of the Jews and rulers of the temple”’ (ἐπεστάτουν τῶν ἱερῶν ἔργων ἐπιμελέστερον συνεργοῦντες τοῖς πρεσβυτέροις τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων καὶ ἱεροστάταις).
154 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Endorsed :
Note of receipt (in another hand) : Address : Ζωίλου περὶ Σαράπιος. ᾿Απολλωνίωι.. Lyn, Αὐδναίου θ,
> »" 4 ἐν τῶι Βερενίκης
ὅρμωι. To Apollonius greeting [from] Zoilus the Aspendian, . . . of the . . . , who also was presented unto thee by the king’s friends.
It happened unto me, while I was serving the god Sarapis for thy health and success with king Ptolemy, that Sarapis warned me many a time (5) in sleep that I should sail over to thee and signify to thee this answer: That there must be made for him?! by thee a temple of Sarapis and a grove in the Greek quarter by the haven, and a priest must oversee it and sacrifice at the altar for you. And when I had besought the god Sarapis that he would set me free from the work here,? he cast me into a great sickness, (10) insomuch that I stood also in jeopardy. But having prayed: to him, if he would heal me, I said that I would endure my ministry and do that which was commanded by him. Now when I was very quickly healed, there came a certain man from Cnidus, who took in hand to build a temple of Sarapis in this place and had brought stones. But afterward the god forbade him to build and he (15) departed. But when I was come unto Alexandria, and delayed to make intercession with thee concerning these things, save of the affair which thou hadst also promised unto me, again I relapsed four months; wherefore I could not straightway * come unto thee. It is therefore well, O Apollonius, that thou follow the command by the god, that Sarapis may be favourable unto thee and make thee much (20) greater with the king and more glorious, together with the health of thy body.. Be not stricken with terror of the expense, as being of great cost to thee; nay, it shall be to thee of great profit, for I will together oversee 3 all
these things. 7 Farewell.
1 Or ‘‘ here.”
2 That is, from the building of the temple, which was to be paid for by Apollonius, but superintended, of course, by Zoilus.
3 Zoilus is not looking on the building of the temple as secular work, but as a sacred ministry, a priestly office; for the expression cf, line 7.
Fic. 21.—Letter from Zoilus to Apollonius: Writing on the Verso.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 155
Endorsed : Note of receipt (in another Address : hand): From Zoilus, concerning | To Apollonius.
Sarapis. In the year 28, on the goth of Audnaeus, at the Port of Berenice.1
The text, which I regard as specially important with refer- ence to our problem of letters and epistles, and which for its own sake has been described by Wilcken as perhaps the crown of the whole fourth volume of the Pubblicazioni, is in all the main essentials intelligible. The style is somewhat forced, and an attempt has been made to imitate this in the trans- lation.
We must put ourselves back in the year 258-257 B.c., the time, we may say, when the earliest pages of the Septuagint Bible were being written in Egypt.
Zoilus, a citizen of Aspendus in Pamphylia, who is closely connected with the cult of Sarapis and has been vouchsafed special revelations by the god, is for the time being at Alexandria. Where his usual residence was we cannot at present ascertain ;? but no doubt it was a coast town some- where in the eastern Mediterranean, not purely Greek, and perhaps at that time under the dominion of King Ptolemy II., Philadelphus.
In this town Zoilus had had an experience in the cult of his god which ultimately drove him to Egypt. As he served before Sarapis he had remembered in his prayers a distant patron, Apollonius, a financial minister of Ptolemy’s, to whom he had stood in relations since his introduction to the power- ful official by members of Egyptian court society. It is probable that the cult of Sarapis had established the link between them. The prayer for the rich man was answered by the god in singular fashion: he commanded his devotee
to convey personally to Apollonius the injunction that in
1 It is not certain where this place was. Edgar (Annales 18, p. 174) thought it might be on the coast of the Red Sea; but he has withdrawn the conjecture (Annales 19,.p. 81). 7
2 Michael Rostovtzeff, A Large Estate in Egypt in the Third Century B.C., Madison, 1922, p. 38 (cf. p. 192) believes that this Zoilus is identical with Zoilus, an agent of Apollonius in Syria, P.S.I. No. 330. Vitelli (p. 161) also reckons with this possibility.
156 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
the town where Zoilus lived (where probably until then there had only been an obscure cult of Sarapis, perhaps in a hired apartment 4) he must build a temple of Sarapis, with a grove and a priest of its own, near the harbour in the Greek quarter.
A great business! Though in itself wholly in accordance with his own most ardent wish, this commission from his god lies heavily on the soul of the devotee, and he begs to be excused. But Sarapis enlightens him as to the seriousness of his command by causing the recalcitrant to fall sick unto death. Then Zoilus in his prayers for recovery promises unconditional obedience. And the business becomes yet more pressing: a servant of Sarapis from Cnidus had taken the opportunity, while the resident representative of the cult was ill, to procure on his own account stones for the building of a temple of Sarapis. But when he begins to build he is obliged to leave the town, for Sarapis has laid him under an injunction not to build. The god does not want just any sort of temple, he wants a temple from Apollonius! Apollonius can do more than the anonymous man of Cnidus.
So Zoilus, having recovered, takes ship for Egypt. And yet, on his arrival in Alexandria, he cannot summon up the necessary enthusiasm to beg of the great man, who is bur- dened with other spiritual affairs as well,? an audience with reference to the matter of the temple. He only discusses with Apollonius another affair altogether, in which there were no difficulties to be feared. Then once more does the angry god cause the hesitant to feel the weight of his hand: the sickness returns again and confines Zoilus to his bed for four months. How gladly would he have hastened to Apollonius the moment the first signs of a relapse set in; but the com- plaint had taken too hard a hold on him. Meanwhile the
1 So Wilcken, Archiv 6, p. 395, who refers attractively to a case in Delos, about 200 B.c. (Inscriptiones Graecae XI. 4, No. 1299), where Sarapis also appears in a dream and demands the erection of a temple to take the place of an apartment hired for the purpose of the cult. Cf. Otto Weinreich, Neue Urkunden zuy Savapis-Religion, Tiibingen, 1919, pp. 19 ff. and 31 ff. It is worth noting that in Delos too the god simply says Sei: ‘‘ there must be built”!
2 Spiritual affairs that find their way to ministers of state are generally also affairs involving finance. Thus in the same year the priests of Aphrodite also . apply to Apollonius (P.S.I. IV. No. 328; cf. Wilcken, Archiv. 6, p. 386), again with the same do μὲ des sort of piety which I describe below, pp. 160 f.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 157
minister has started on an official journey, and can only be reached by letter. ᾿
Accordingly Zoilus writes to Apollonius from Alexandria and tells the whole story in all its gravity : the epiphanies of the god, his wrath, and the risk that an obscure man of Cnidus might have secured the stock of merit. Never- theless nothing has yet been lost; there is certainly no time to spare, but the mighty lord can yet be satisfied, and Sarapis will most graciously reward his willing slave, for whom daily sacrifice will be made in the sanctuary of his founding: his influence at the royal court will increase, the name of Apol- lonius will acquire new fame for piety over land and sea, and—be it not forgotten—the god who punishes the stubborn so terribly with sickness will reward obedience with health and long life.1 What will the expense matter in comparison with this? The capital will bear interest! And personal trouble for Apollonius in the building of the temple there will be none: he, Zoilus, will regard it as his sacred duty to act as assistant to Apollonius in all the business part of the under- taking.
The letter reached its destination; its receipt was duly noted, and it was docketed “ Sarapis”’? in the office of Zeno, one of Apollonius’s subordinates.
The importance of this letter of Zoilus to the historian of the cult of Sarapis has been pointed out by Edgar, and more particularly by Wilcken. It affords, they say, a glimpse into the propaganda of the cult; it shows how closely it was bound up with the Egyptian court and its officials. ἢ
That is perfectly true, but at the same time it points also to the importance of the text in helping us to understand the nature of the letters of St. Paul. Zoilus’s letter is in Greek one of the first exact parallels to the letters of St. Paul, inasmuch as it is an accidentally preserved fragment of actual correspondence devoted to the propaganda of an ancient cult. It is not propaganda literature, but a reflex of
1 The experienced propagandist thoroughly understands how to treat the tich man.
2 The formula is interesting; one would have expected “ temple of Sarapis ”’ (which in the original is almost as short, Sarapaeum).
158 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
the propaganda, in fact itself an act of propaganda, a tiny “portion of an actual happening.
Of course every missionary cult in ancient times produced quantities of such correspondence, but all that vast mass of written sheets that once had travelled between Egypt and all parts of the Mediterranean world, or, say, between Syria and Italy, vividly reflecting the visions, intentions and itineraries of the propagators, the successes and failures of their work, the finances of their propaganda—all is practically lost as regards most of the cults. Only the cult of Christ, by collecting and canonising the letters of St. Paul, succeeded in saving a portion of its most ancient missionary documents. And now in the letter of Zoilus there appears one of the lost sheets relating to the cult of Sarapis, helping us to do greater justice to the non-literary character of the apostolic letters.
It should also be remarked that indirectly it yields much that is explanatory of St. Paul’s subject matter. We observe things common to the two men, and striking contrasts between them. They both regard the work of their pro- paganda as their divine ministry.1 St. Paul like Zoilus 3 is under the direct, effective authority of his Lord and is guided in important moments of his life by instructions from above, by command 3 and (like the man from Cnidus 4) by prohibition,® and, like the servant of Sarapis,* he knows the unescapable divine “ must’? attaching to instruction. They both venture to ask in prayer to be freed from divine burdens, but they learn that the higher Will is the stronger.® St. Paul, like Zoilus,® is led by a vision in a dream to under- take a voyage 1°; and, like him, St. Paul knows the binding force of a vow.22, The slave of Christ, like the servant of Sarapis,!* is visited with frequent sickness,!4 and St. Paul, like Zoilus,!5 recognises that his suffering is by the will of God. They both practise intercession for distant adherents
1 Zoilus 1.11; 2 Cor. ix.12; Rom. xv. 16. 2 Zoilus 1. 4.
3 Gal. ii. 1, 2; Acts xxii. 18, etc. 4 Zoilus 1. 14.
5 Acts xvi. 6, 7. ® Zoilus 1. 6, δεῖ.
7 δεῖ Acts xix. 21; ἀνάγκη I Cor. ix. 16. § Zoilus 1. 8 ff.; 2 Cor. xii. 8 ff. 9. Zoilus ll. 5, 15. 10 Acts xvi. 9 ff. 11. Zoilus 1, τὸ f.
12 Acts xviii. 18; cf. xxi. 23 ff. 13 Zoilus ll. 9 f., 17.
14. 2 Cor. xii. 7 ff. etc. : 18 Zoilus ll. 9 f., 17.
16 2 Cor. xii. 7 ff.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 159
of the cult,? and both are troubled by rivals in piety.? Then too, as regards form, the non-literary habit common to the two men is shown, for example, in the anacolutha, savouring of conversational language, which we find in their letters.
The contrasts, it is true, are more striking. The strength and character of the apostle’s cult of Christ stand out clearly against the background afforded by this document of the cult of Sarapis. ;
First of all, the enormous contrast of the sociological structure. The representative of the cult of Sarapis, having been “‘ introdticed’’ to the minister of finance, is in im- mediate touch with one of the richest and most powerful politicians of his time, and enjoys through him close indirect relations with the court of Ptolemy. The main unspoken argument of the whole letter is that the king is to be regarded as the chief patron of the cult of Sarapis, and that therefore the foundation of a temple of Sarapis will be the best means of rising in the king’s favour. Accordingly a man who is a leading devotee of Sarapis does not stoop to trifles: his god entrusts him with commissions that cost something—cost so much, in fact, that smooth words must be spoken even to the wealthy Apollonius. But even if the minister failed to respond, money and materials for the temple would be otherwise obtainable.
The tentmaker of Tarsus was not “introduced ’’ to any- body. At the utmost he was brought before the government officials as an accused man; friendly meetings, such as that with the governor of Cyprus,4 were accidental. His “connexions’’ were exclusively with the unpropertied classes.6 And even his Alexandrian friend, also an Apol- lonius,® was “‘ mighty ”’ only in the scriptures.? Paul had
1 Zoilus 1. 3 f.; Phil. i. 3 etc.
2 In the words of Zoilus concerning the man from Cnidus the same con- sciousness of a “‘ parochia ”’ seems to find expression as for instance in the words of St. Paul, Rom. xv. 20, where he says that he made it his ambition not to ‘build upon another man’s foundation,” ἵνα μὴ én’ ἀλλότριον θεμέλιον οἰκοδομῶ. The Cnidian had obviously wanted to build on Zoilus’s ἀλλότριον θεμέλιον.
5. Cf. Wilcken, Archiv 6, p. 395.
* Acts xiii. 6 ff. : 5 1 Cor. i. 26 ff.
* In Acts xviii. 24, it will be remembered, Codex D calls mpellos by his unshortened name, Apollonius.
7 Acts xviii. 24.
160 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
no connexions with the court; the salutations he once sends from them “ that are of Caesar’s household ”’? are not from princesses and ministers, but from simple Imperial slaves, petty clerks, employed perhaps at Ephesus in the departments of finance or of crown lands. Enterprises aiming at the court and court society, such as the inspired and unillusioned Zoilus cleverly prepared, are by their nature utterly foreign to the apostle. When Paul had financial problems to solve there were no estimates for marble ashlars, columns and statues to be thought of, for the demon of building had not yet taken hold of the young cult. Building does play a large part in the imagination of the apostles, whose divine Master had Himself in His earthly presence been a workman of the building craft? ; and there is talk of temples. But with Paul it is always buildings “‘ not made with hands,” ὃ and not paid for in talents, that are thought of: the body as the temple of the Holy Ghost,‘ the congregation as the temple of the living God. And if Paul likens himself to a “ masterbuilder,” * an architect, the epoch of the great architectural popes is still a long way off. We owe, however, to the apostle the deep and fruitful idea of inward, spiritual “ edification.” 7 Like Zoilus, St. Paul hints at financial anxieties in his letters; but he sets them forth, not to a millionaire, but to people who work with their hands, who in the bazaars of the artisans and in the quarters near the harbours of the cities were to put by their obols week by week for their poor associates in the cult at Jerusalem.®
But it is the deep difference in their ethos that is decisive when we come to estimate the two cults from the point of view of religious history. The cult of Sarapis, at least as represented by Zoilus of Aspendus, is, down to its practical activity, a hedonistic religion. Although sociologically it has made itself at home in the highest altitudes of wealth, power, and culture, though it has at its command the great arts of architecture and sculpture as practised in the Hel- lenistic age, it remains as a religion something quite primitive,
1 Phil. iv, 22. 2 σέκτων, Mark vi. 3. 8 2Cor. v. 1. 4 1 Cor. vi. 19. 5 1 Cor-iii.9, 16 £.; 2 Cor. vi. 16; Eph. ii. 20 ff. δα Cor. iii. το.
7 1 Cor. xiv. 3, 5, 12, 26, etc. § 1 Cor. xvi. 1 f.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 161
really a business transaction, do ué des, between man and a fetish: Build a temple, and your influence with the king increases; if you do not build, you fall ill! All the great religions, including vulgar Christianity, have of course in unnumbered instances of their empirical manifestation remained as closely bound up with hedonism as the religion of Zoilus: religion of works! But three hundred years after the letter of Zoilus other letters relating to a new cult cross the same sea—letters whose religious centre of energy is grace. Preached to the insignificant, the revelation of grace afterwards, with a divine energy ever renewed, seizes hold of the great, an Augustine, a Luther. And it will remain the heart’s pulse of reformations ; for always and every-. where, even with a choice stock that has been brought to great perfection, the wild strain asserts itself again: the .. primitive religion of performance comes thrusting upward again and again with elemental force. St. Paul’s great reformation, his fight for grace, his fight against justification by works, was directed in practice not only against vulgar Judaism, but also against the cults of the Gentiles. A religion still without a tabernacle, the apostle’s cult of Christ is, by virtue of grace, inwardly superior to the glittering magnificence of the neighbouring cults. Those cults were seemingly divided from the coarseness of primitive religious instincts by a world of the most refined formal culture; but had. their tabernacles been opened, naught save the uncultivated primitive would frequently have been dis- coverable. It is a peculiarity of the earliest Christianity that to men of primitive instincts, nurtured in primitive and external religion, it imparts religion in its highest perfection and inwardness (and yet, with simplest forms of expression).
162 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
3 and 4 Two letters from Palestine: Tubias, Sheikh of the Ammonites, to Apollonius, Egyptian minister of finance, and to King Ptolemy 11., Philadelphus, Transjordania, 257-256 B.C., papyrus from the correspondence of Zeno found at Philadelphia (Fayim), now in the Cairo Museum, edited by C. C. Edgar? (Figures 22 and 23).
TovBias ᾿Απολλωνίωι χαίρειν. καθάπερ μοι ἔγραψας ἀποστεῖλα[ι] [ea ἐν Ὁ φόφηρος ee ee 7 μηνί, ἀπέσταλκα τοῦ Ἐανδικ[οῦ] τὸν παρ᾽ ἡμῶν τῆι δεκάτ[ηι ἄγοντα τὸν δεῖνα] ἵππους δύο, κύνας [ξ]ξ; ἡμιονά[γριον] ἐξ ὄνου ἕν, ὑποζύγιᾳ [᾿ΑἹρᾳβικὰ λευκὰ δύο, πῴ[λους] ἐξ ἡμιοναγ[ρίου δύο], 5 πῶλον ἐξ ὀναγρίου ἕνα. ταῦτα 8 ἐστὶν τιθασά. ἀπέσταλκα δέ [σοι] καὶ τὴν ἐπι[σ]τολὴν τὴν γραφεῖσαν παρ᾽ ἡμῶν ὑπὲρ τῶν ξενί[ων] τῶι: βασιλεῖ, ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ τἀντίγραφα αὐτῆς ὅπως εἰδῆις. ᾿ ἔρρωσο. ἰ-κθ, Ἐϊανδικοῦ ι. (Copy :] Βασιλεῖ Πτολεμαίωι χαίρειν TovBias* ἀπέσταλκά σοι ἵππο[υς δύο,] IO κύνας ἕξ, ἡμιονάγριον ἐξ ὄνου ἕν, ὑποζύγια [᾿Ἀρ]ᾳβικὰ λευκὰ [δύο,] πώλους ἐξ ἡμιοναγρίου δύο, πῶλον ἐξ ὀναγρίον ἕνα.
. εὐτύχει. Endorsed : Note of receipt (in another hand) : Address : TovBias τῶν ἀπεσταλμένων ᾿Απολλωνίωι.
τῶι βασιλεῖ καὶ τῆς πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα ἐπιστολῆς τὸ ἀντίγραφον. Lx, ᾿Αρτεμισίον tS, ἐν ᾿Αλεξαν.
Tubias to Apollonius greeting. As thou didst write unto me to send... . (for the) . . . month, I have sent 2 on the tenth of Xandicus N. N., one of our men,® bringing two horses, six dogs, -one wild-ass mule by an ass, two white Arabian asses,! two colts
1 Annales du Service des Antiquités de l’Egypte, vol. 18, No. 13, p. 231 ff. The letter to the king was enclosed in the letter to Apollonius, and not left open; but Apollonius received a copy for his information.
“3 In the Greek “ I sent ’’( as usually in epistolary style).
3 (Or, following the English rendering of Mark iii. 21, ‘‘ our friend.” For “N.N.” (the ‘‘such a man” of Matt. xxvi. 18) cf. pp. 177; 302, ἢ. 5. The whole phrase is like saying in modern English, ‘‘ our Mr. So-and-so.” ΤᾺ]
4 ὑποζύγιον, ‘‘ beast for the yoke, beast of burden,” is here used in the same specialised sense as in the Greek Bible (Bibelstudien, p. 158f.; Bible Studies, p.160f.). Both in ancient (Judges v. 10) and in modern times white asses are accounted rare and specially valuable (Guthe, Kurzes Bibelwérteybuch, p. 168; and Encyclopaedia Biblica, I., col. 344).
ΈΘΡΗ Ὃ Ὃ Aq pourezgo A[pury oprunsoey ‘wasn OID 94} UI MON ᾿Β591791111|90 S€ Χ Sz ‘Jeurls10 ey} 10 ezig “(πῃ (Ὲ 1) erydjepeltyg wo snihdeg da 9Sz—LSz ‘eruepsiolsuery, ‘snydjeperit “11 ΑαμΙΘ]Ο 4 Bury 08 pue ‘soueuy 10 19151πιπι ueydASq ᾿5ππιοιοάν 03 ‘soPIUOWIUTY 911 10 YRIEYS ‘seiqn], wor 5192291--- 22 ‘OI
| i : oe
See rd oy. é
‘OSIOA 91|2 UO ϑιπλιαλλ, ΣΙ Awejoyg Bury oF pue sniuoyody 0} seiqny, {π01} 51922191|- 8 “OI
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 163
by a wild-ass mule, (5) one colt bya wild-ass. They are tamed.} But I have sent? unto thee also the letter written by us for 3. the presents to the king, likewise also the copies thereof, that thou mayest know.
Farewell. In the year 29, Xandicus roth.
[Copy :] To King Ptolemy greeting [from] Tubias. I have sent 2 unto thee two horses, (10) six dogs, one wild-ass mule by an ass, two white Arabian asses,4 two colts by a wild-ass mule, one colt by a wild-ass.
Mayest thou fare well.
Endorsed : Note of receipt (in another Address : hand): Tubias, of things sent To Apollonius.
to the king, and the copy of the letter to the king. In the year 29, Artemisius 26th, at Alexan.
The mighty Apollonius is concerned not only with Sarapis but also with the little hobbies of his sovereign. Philadelphus was passionately fond of animals.5 And so the minister doubtless felt he was providing no ordinary treat for his august lord when he ordered of the-Ammonite sheikh a present of valuable animals for him from abroad, and Tubias duly sent them, including some specimens of remarkable cross-breeding.
This Tubias, chieftain of the Ammonites, is a personage known also from other papyri in the correspondence of Zeno,® and of considerable interest to us.’ He is probably
1 No easy accomplishment in the case of the wild ass; the animal was accounted untamable (Guthe, p. 727). In Job xxxix. 7 it is said of him, “he scorneth the tumult of the city” (R.V.; LXX καταγελῶν πολυοχλίας πόλεως). One wonders what Tubias’s steppe-land animals may have thought of the cosmopolitan city of Alexandria.
2 In the Greek “1 sent” (as usually in epistolary style).
3 (On this preposition cf. p. 166,n. 6. TR.J 4 See note 4, p. 162.
5 Diodorus iii. 36 (quoted by Edgar, p. 231).
6 Cf. the contract for the purchase of slaves, No. 3 in Edgar (p. 164 ff.), and the other letter from Tubias mentioned 7b7d., pp. 165, 232.
7 In 1z Macc. v. 13 (a hundred years after our Tubias) ‘‘ the people of Tubias “' {or ‘‘ the land of Tubias "᾿ as the R.V. has it. Tr.] are mentioned, and in the parallel passage, 2 Macc. xii. 17, ‘“‘ the Jews that are called Tubieni.’”’ On the possible connexions cf. my note, ‘‘ Tubias,’’ in the Byzantinisch-Neugrie- chische Jahrbiicher (edited by N. A. Bees), vol. 2, p. 275 f.; and H. Gressmann, Die ammonitischen Tobiaden, Sitzungsberichte der Preussischen Akademie
“δι Ulin. tt -
164 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
connected somehow as a dependent (or ally) with the Egyptian king, but is obviously, as the tone of his letters shows, a gentleman with a good conceit of himself. The instantaneous picture shown in the two letters is altogether extremely remarkable; together with the other Palestinian items in the correspondence of Zeno it furnishes valuable first-hand evidence for the history of the Holy Land in the third century B.C.
5
Letter from Demophon, a wealthy Egyptian, to Ptolemaeus, a police official, civca 245 B.C., papyrus from mummy wrap- pings found in the necropolis of El-Hibeh, now in. the posses- sion of the Museum of Victoria University, Toronto, Canada; discovered and published by Grenfell and Hunt 1 (Figure 24).
. Δημοφῶν Πτολε- Demophon to Ptolemaeus μαίωι ὃ χαίρειν. ἀπό[σ]- greeting.? Send us by all τειλον ἡμῖν ἐκ παν- means the piper (5) Petoys
x ΄ ν > TOS τρόπου TOV αυ-
with both the Phrygian pipes and the others. And if it is necessary to spend anything,
5 λητὴν Πετῶυν ἔχοντ[α] τούς τε Ppvyiovs ai- λ[ο]ὺς καὶ τοὺς λοιπούς. κ[αὶ]
ἐάν τι δέηι ἀνηλῶσαι pay it. Thou shalt receive it δός. παρὰ δὲ ἡμ[ῶ]ν κομε- from us. (10) And send us also Io εἴ 3. ἀπόστειλον δὲ ἡ[μ]ῖν Zenobius the effeminate,* with καὶ Ζηνόβιον τὸν pada- tabret, and cymbals,’ and
a 4 4 Mw lA i ql Fe OES TUE OY καὶ rattles. For the women have
foe ἢ νοι τον need of him at (15) the sacrifice.
a yap ἐστι Tals γυναιξὶν προς 5 υ 2 15 τὴν θυσίαν. ἐχέτω δὲ And let him have also raiment καὶ ἱματισμὸν ws ἀσ- as fair as may be. And fetch
κύμβαλα ὃ καὶ κρόταλα. χρεί-
1 The Hibeh Papyri, No. 54.—For the photograph here reproduced in slightly reduced facsimile (Figure 24), by kind permission of the Egypt Exploration Fund, I am indebted to the courtesy of Dr. Grenfell. Cf. also Helbing, p. 50 ff.; Schubart, Ein Jahvtausend, Ὁ. 33f.; Wilcken, Chresto- mathie, p. 563; Witkowski, Epistulae?, No. 21.
2 Ptolemaeus seems to have held some post in the police force of the nome of Oxyrhynchus. ‘
3 Wilcken’s conjecture.
4 The word is no doubt used in its secondary (obscene) sense, as by St. Paul in 1 Cor. vi.9. It is an allusion to the foul practices by which the musician eked out his earnings. Cf. the remarks in Chapter IV. on the lists of vices (p. 316, π. 6).
St. Paul is thinking of cymbals such as these, employed for religious music, in 1 Cor. xiii. 1.
Fic. 24.—Letter from Demophon, a wealthy Egyptian, to Ptolemaeus, a police official, civca 245B.c. Papyrus from Hibeh. Formerly in the possession of the Egypt Exploration Fund, by whose permission it is here reproduced. Now in the Museum of Victoria University, Toronto, Canada.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE τόσ
τειότατον. κόμισαι δὲ καὶ τὸν ἔριφον ὃ παρὰ ᾿Αρισ- τίωνος καὶ πέμψον ἡμῖν.
20 καὶ τὸ σῶμα 3 δὲ 5 εἰ συνεί- ληφας παράδος [[αὐτὸ]] 4 Σεμφθεῖ ὅπως αὐτὸ δι- ακομίσηι ἡμῖν. ἀπόσ- τειλον δὲ ἡμῖν καὶ τυ-
25 ροὺς ὅσους ἂν δύνηι καὶ κέραμον κα[ι]νὸν καὶ λά- χανα π[αντ]ρδαπὰ καὶ ἐὰν ὄψον τι ἔχη! [ς.]
ἔρρ[ωσο.]
30 ἐμβαλοῦ δὲ αὐτὰ καὶ φυ- λακίτας οἱ  συνδιακομιοῦ-
ow [[4ᾳ]] τὸ πλοῖο[ν.]
also the kid! from Aristion and send it to us. (20) Yea, and if thou hast taken the slave? deliver him to Semph- theus that he may bring him to us. And send us also cheeses (25) as many as thou canst, and new earthenware, and herbs of every kind, and delicacies if thou hast any.
Farewell. (30) Put them on board and guards with them who will help in bringing the boat over.
Endorsed :
Πτολεμαίωι.
| To Ptolemaeus.
The letter gives us a glimpse of the domestic life of an obviously well-to-do family. A festival is coming on: mother and daughter insist that at the sacrifice (and sacri- ficial dance?) flutes and the rattle of castanets shall not be wanting, and of course the musicians must be nicely dressed. Then come anxieties about the festive meal, from the roast to the dessert, not forgetting the new crockery that must be bought for kitchen and table, and added to this the annoy- ance of the runaway slave—really, as master of the house, there is much for Demophon to think of; and it is no light matter, the transport of man and beast, pottery, cheese, and vegetables. But there, friend Ptolemaeus, who is over the guards, will lend a few of his men who can help the boatmen,
1 No doubt to furnish the roast meat at the feest, such as the brother of ~ the Prodigal Son considered himself entitled to (Luke χν. 29).
2 σῶμα means “‘slave,’’ as frequently in the Greek Old and New Testaments (Bibelstudien, p. 158; Bible Studies, p. 160). This example is of exactly the same date as the oldest portions of the Septuagint, and comes from the land of the Septuagint.—The slave had run away from Demophon, as Onesimus did from Philemon (cf. St. Paul’s letter to Philemon). ᾿
3 δέ after καί and standing as the fourth word of the sentence, as in Matt. x. 18, John vi. 51,1 Johni. 3 and even earlier.
4 The word enclosed in double brackets was erased by the writer’ of the
Ietter.
166 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
and money shall be no obstacle. Altogether the details of the proposed festival remind us of the slight but very lifelike touches with which Jesus pictures the feast at the return of the Prodigal Son.!
6
Letter from Asclepiades, an Egyptian landowner, to Portis, his tenant, B.c.—(Ptolemaic period), ostracon from Thebes, now in the possession of Ulrich Wilcken and published by him? (Figure 25).
‘This is a private receipt, written, like so many others,® in the form of a private letter. It is inserted here as a characteristic example of a letter written to order by an amanuensis.
[A ]oxAymea(Sys) Χαρμάγοντος Ἴτυν Περμάμιος xai(pew). ἀπέχωά παρὰ σοῦ τὸ βάλλον ὃ μοι ἐκφόριόν καὶ ἐπιγένη(μα) 5. οὗ ἐμίσθωσά σοι κλήρου εἰς τὸν σπόρον τοῦ κε L κοὐθέν σοι ἐνκαλῶ. ἔγραψεν ὑπὲρ αὐ(τοῦ) Ἐὔμη- (Aos) Ἕρμαί. .. .) ἀξιωθεὶς διὰ τὸ βραδύ- αὐτὸν γρά(φειν). L κε Φαμενὼθ B.
IO τεραῦ
1 Luke xv. 22 ff.
2 Griechische Ostraka, 11. No. 1027.
ἐπι- ε
Asclepiades, the son of Char- magon, to Portis the son of Permamis greeting. I have received * from thee the fruit that falleth to me® and in- crease (5) of the lot that I have let to thee for the sowing of the year 25, and I lay nothing to thy charge. Written for δ him hath Eumelus, the son of Herma ...., being desired so to do for that he (10) writeth somewhat slowly.? In the year 25, Phamenoth 2.
The facsimile there given (Plate 1118)
is reproduced here (Fig. 25) by the kind permission of the author and Messrs.
Giesecke and Devrient, Leipzig. 3 Cf. examples above, pp. 105, 111. * Cf. above p. 110 ff.
5 A regular formula, as in the parable of the Prodigal Son, Luke xv. 12; cf. Neue Bibelstudien, P. 57; Bible Studies, Ὁ. 230.
8 This ‘‘ for,’’ meaning
‘as representative of,’ occurs in many texts of
similar character, and is not without bearing on the question of ὑπέρ in the New
Testament.
7 This is no doubt a euphemism (cf. p. 92, n. 6 above), but it helps to
explain a habit of St. Paul, the artisan missionary. St. Paul generally dictated his letters, no doubt because writing was not an easy thing to his workman’s hand. Then in his Jayge handwriting (Gal. vi. 11), over which he himself makes merry (Bibelsiudien, p. 264; Bible Studies, p. 348; Moulton and Milligan, The Expositor, Oct. 1908, p. 383), he himself
Fic. 25.—Letter from Asclepiades, an Egyptian landowner, to Portis. Ptolemaic Period. Ostracon from Thebes. Now in the possession of Ulrich Wilcken. Reproduced by permission of the owner and his publishers.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE τ67
7 Letter from Hilarion, an Egyptian labourer, to Alis, his wife, Alexandria, 17 June, 1 B.c., papyrus from Oxyrhynchus, now in the possession of the Museum of Victoria University, Toronto, Canada; discovered and published by Grenfell and Hunt ! (Figure 26). e The letter is of a very vulgar type, although the writer makes efforts at the beginning, e.g. not to forget the iota adscript.?
Ἱλαρίων a3 ἴλλιτι τῆι ἀδελφῆι 3 Hilarion to Alis his sister 4 πλεῖστα χαί- many greetings. Also to Be-
Ν - a ἔν 5 pew καὶ Βεροῦτι τῇ κυρία μου 5 Ἵ rus my lady > and Apollonarin. καὶ ᾿Απολλω- y y P νάριν. γίνωσκε ὡς ἔτι καὶ νῦν ἐν ᾿Αλεξαν- | now in Alexandrea [sic]. Be
Know that we are still even
adds a conclusion, which perhaps begins in Galatians at verse 2 of chapter V. According to aicient procedure the autograph conclusion was the token of authenticity, cf. C. G. Bruns, Die Unterschriften in den rémischen Rechtsurkunden, Philologische und Historische Abhandlungen der K6niglichen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin aus dem Jahre 1876, pp. 41-138, especially pp. 69 f., 81, 83, 90, 121, 137. Wilcken called my attention to this important essay. Dziatzko, in the article quoted at p. 146 above, refers to the statement of C. Julius Victor (Rhet. lat. min. p- 448 Halm) : observabant veteres carissimis sua manu scribere vel plurimum subscribere, ‘‘ to very intimate correspondents the ancients used to write or, very often, sign the letter with their own hand.” The autograph signatures to papyrus letters are greatly in need of.investigation (cf. e.g. Schubart, Tabulae Nos. 34b and 35; Ferdinand Ziemann, De epistularum Graecarum formulis sollemnibus quaestiones selectae, Halis Sax., 1911, p. 362 ff.; and L. Eisner, Papyri Iandanae, fasc. 2, p. 41). A study of them would lead toa better appreciation of that extremely important passage in 2 Thess. iii. 17, which some most strangely regard as a mark of spuriousness : “ the salutation of Paul with mine own hand, which is the token in every letter: so I write.” The token (the last line or two in autograph) has the same significance as the symbolum, which in other cases was sometimes given to the bearer to take with him as proof of his commission; cf. the pre-Christian letter of Timoxenus to Moschion, preserved in the Passalacqua Papyrus (Bibelstudien, p. 212 1. [not given in Bible Studies]; Witkowski, Epistulae privatae, No. 25, *No. 34)» and Letronne, Notices et Extraits, 18,2, p.407f. In one of the letters of Plato (No. 13, Epistolographi Graeci rec. Rudolphus Hercher, Parisiis, 1873, p. 528) ξύμβολον actually has the same meaning as σημεῖον in St. Paul: a sign of authenticity contained in the letter itself—From his own statement, just quoted, it follows of course that St. Paul appended an autograph conclusion to all his letters, even where he does not expressly say so. The recipients observed it at once by the difference in the handwriting. Cf. the remarks on letter No. 8 below, p. 171 f. In the Second Epistle to the Corinthians the autograph conclusion begins at x. 1.
_[For notes 1 to 5 see next page.
168 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
δρέα Vopev. μὴ ἀγωνιᾶς, ἐὰν not distressed if at the general ὅλως eis- (5) coming in! I remain at
5 Topevovrar? ἐγὼ ἐν ᾿Αλεξανδρέα | Alexandrea. I pray 2 thee and beseech thee, take care of the little child. And as soon as
μένω.
3 ΠῚ ὰ n EpwTw σε Kat παρακαλῶ σε
ἐπιμελή- : : ae! +s ox ogy |-we receive wages? I will send Oyt>e τῶ παιδίω καὶ ἐὰν εὐθὺς ὀψώνι- thee? up. If thou... art ov AdBupev® ἀποστελῶ σεῦ | delivered, if it was § a male ἄνω. ἐὰν (xo) child, let it (live); if it was πολλὰ wodAGv > τέκης, ἐὰν ἦν | female, cast it out.? Thou ἄρσε- saidst® unto Aphrodisias,
10 νον ἄφες, ἐὰν ἦν θήλεα ἔκβαλε. Ἷ
“Forget me not.” How can elpnxas® δὲ ᾽Α φροδισιᾶτι ὅτι μή με 8
I forget thee? I pray 9 thee, Nader; ἐδωτῶῦ ceaty a μὴ ὡγώ: therefore, that thou be not νιάσης. distressed. (15) In the year 29
15 L «6 Καίσαρος Παῖῦνι xy. of the Caesar, Pauni 23.
ἐπιλάθης. πῶς δύναμαί oe ἐπι- 9
1 Probably the return of Hilarion’s fellow-workmen from Alexandria to Oxyrhynchus is referred to.
2 ἐρωτάω, “I pray (thee),’’ generally explained as a Semiticism in the Greek Bible, is common in popular texts: Bzbelstudien, Ὁ. 45; Neue Bibel- studien, p. 23; Bible Studies, pp. 290, 195.
3 A regular formula, as in the New Testament: Neue Bibelstudien, p. 94; Bible Studies, p. 266.
4 Hilarion has written the accusative instead of the dative. He means, ‘‘ I will send (them) up fo thee.”
5 πολλαπολλων has not yet been explained with certainty. Witkowski thinks it implies a wish, quod bene vertat, something like “ great, great luck!” Other
[For continuation of notes see next page.
Notes to page 167 :—
1 The Oxyrhynchus Papyri, IV. No. 744.—A photograph was very kindly obtained for me by Dr. Grenfell, and from this was made the slightly reduced facsimile (Fig. 26) which is here reproduced by permission of the Egypt Exploration Fund.—The letter has also been published by Lietzmann, Grie- chische Papyvi, p. 8 £.,*p. 7; Witkowski, Epistulae privatae, p. 97 f., ΞΡ. 131 ff.; Milligan, Selections, Ὁ. 32 Ἐ.; Helbing, Auswahl, p. 77 ff.; Laudien, p. 1 ff.; Schubart, Ein Jahvtausend, p. 49.
2 Witkowski prints it wherever Grenfell and Hunt have inserted the iota subscript, which Hilarion did not use. I give the text without alteration, so as not to detract from its vulgar character.
3 The a is a slip of the writer.
4 Alis is Hilarion’s wife. ‘‘ Sister’ might be a tender form of address, but is probably to be taken literally : marriages between brother and sister were not uncommon in Egypt. Cf. Egon Weiss, Endogamie und Exogamie im rémischen Kaiserreich, Zeitschrift der Savigny-Stiftung fiir Rechts- geschichte, Vol. 29, Romanistische Abteilung, p. 351 ff. ,
5 A courteous form of address in letters, as in 2 John 1 and 5.
Fic. 26.—Letter from Hilarion, an Egyptian labourer, to Alis, his wife. Papyrus, written at Alexandria, 17 June, 1 B.c. Formerly in the possession of the Egypt Exploration Fund, by whose permission it is reproduced. Now in the Museum of Victoria University, Toronto, Canada.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE τόρ
Endorsed : Ἱλαρίων “Adare ἀπόδος. | Hilarion to Alis. Deliver.
The situation in this letter is clear as to the chief facts. Hilarion is working for wages in the metropolis, Alexandria, and intends to remain there although his fellow-workmen are already about to return home. Anxiety is felt for him at home at Oxyrhynchus by his wife Alis, who is living with (her mother?) Berus and (her only child?) Apollonarin. She is expecting her confinement; gloomy thoughts arise within her: Hilarion has forgotten me, he sends neither letter nor money, and where is bread to come from for the growing family? She confides her trouble to her friend Aphrodisias, who is going to Alexandria, and through her Hilarion hears of his wife’s sad case. He sends the letter (by his comrades who are returning home, or by Aphrodisias) : words merely, no money (the wages are said to be not yet paid), and in spite of tender lines for the child, in spite of the sentimental ““ How can I e’er forget thee? ’’ 1 nothing but brutal advice in the main: if it is a girl that you are bringing into the world, expose it. Has custom blunted the fatherly instinct
1 [There is a German song by Hoffmann von Fallersleben (1841), beginning “ Wie kénnt’ ich dein vergessen ’’ and with the same words in the refrain. ΤᾺ.)
Continuation of notes from page 168 :— conjectures in Grenfell and Hunt, and Lietzmann; cf. also U. von Wilamo- witz-Moellendorff, Géttingische gelehrte Anzeigen, 1904, p. 662; A. Harnack, Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 29 (1904) col. 457. An attractive one by Fr. Pfister, Berl. Philol. Wochenschr. 33 (1913) col. 926 f.
§ [‘* But the birth is still future, and ἦν is certainly, as often, an illiterate spelling of 7,” said the kindly reviewer (J. H. Moulton ?) in The Times 15 Dec. 1910 (Literary Supplement, 16 Dec., p. 509). The translator thought so too, and had printed a note, ‘‘ mistake for ‘ be’ ”’ which was suppressed, however, because the author wrote, ‘‘ I think it is better not to note the ἦν as a ‘ mistake.’ It is a popular anticipation of the fact.” Tr.]
7 The opposite of LXX Exod. i. 16 (cf. 22): ἐὰν μὲν ἄρσεν ἦ, ἀποκτείνατε αὐτό" ἐὰν δὲ θῆλυ, περιποιεῖσθε adtd. On the exposure of infants in antiquity Lietzmann quotes Justinus, Apol. I. 27 ff., who condemns the custom severely. See also J. Geffcken, Zwei griechische Apologeten, Leipzig und Berlin, 1907, p. 283; Ludwig Mitteis, Reichsrecht und Volksrecht in den Gstlichen Provinzen des vémischen Kaiserreichs, Leipzig, 1891, p. 361; and especially the article “‘Kinderaussetzung ’’ by Egon Weiss in Pauly-Wissowa-Kroll, Real-Enzyklo- padie.
8 No doubt Aphrodisias had been commissioned to convey this piteous injunction to the absent husband.
® See note 2 on previous page.
170 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
in him? Has poverty made him unfeeling towards. his own flesh and blood? Is he, as his name implies, a gay dog, a good-for-nothing, to whom it is all one so long as he can have his pleasure in the great city? Or are we doing him an injustice, because we do not understand that mysterious poliapolion? But there is no explaining away the fact that a child is expected and is perhaps to be exposed. I have met with a striking parallel in Apuleius1: a man setting out on a journey orders his wife, who is in expectation of be- coming a mother, to kill the child immediately if it should prove to be a girl.
In any case, therefore, the letter displays a sad picture of civilisation in the age which saw the birth of the great Friend .of Children, a scene in which the fortunes of a proletarian family are reflected in their naked horror, a background of distinct contrast to what Jesus said of the value of children. In the time of poor Alis frightened mothers innumerable of the lower class, who found it difficult to be motherly owing to the scarcity of daily bread, were waiting for that which to us—such is the extent of the moral conquests made by the Gospel—seems to be a thing of course. A century and a half ‘later the Epistle to Diognetus (v. 6) boasts that the Christians do not expose their children.
8
Letter from Mystarion, an Egyptian olive-planter, to Stotoétis, a chief priest, 12 Sept. 50 A.D., papyrus from the Fayim, now in the Reichspost Museum at Berlin, published by Fritz Krebs 3 (Figures 27 and 28).
Μυσταρίων Srordéyr τῶι Mystarion to his οὐ ὃ ἰδίωι 8 πλεῖσ a χαίρειν. - | Stotoétis many greetings. érepia* ὑμεῖν Βλάστον τὸν I have sent‘ unto you my ἐμὸν Blastus for forked (9) > sticks χάριν διχίλων 5 ξύλων εἰς τοὺς for (5) my οἰϊνε-βαγάβηβϑ" See 5 ἐλαιῶνάς 6 pov. ὅρα οὖν μὴ | then that thou stay him not. αὐτὸν For thou knowest how I need κατάσχῃς. οἶδας γὰρ πῶς αὐτοῦ | him every hour. ἑκάστης ὥρας χρήζωι.
1 Metamorphoses, ed. Eyssenhardt, x. 23. [Cf. Ovid, Met. ix. 675-9, instructions of Ligdus to his wife Telethusa, in the story of Iphis and Ianthe. TR.]
[For continuation of notes sce next page.
oe = 23 06.»
Io
Fic. 28.
Letter from Mystarion, an Egyptian olive-planter, to Stotoétis, a chief priest, Address (Fig. 27) and Text (Fig. 28), 12 September, 50 a.D. Papyrus from the Fayim. Now in the Reichspost Museum at Berlin. Reproduced by permission of the Museum authorities.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 171
(In another hand :) ἔρρωσο. (In another hand :) Farewell.
L ta Τιβερίου Κλαυδίου Kai- In the year 11 of Tiberius
σαρος Σεβαστοῦ Claudius Caesar Augustus (10)
Io Tepp[a]vexo[t]  Adroxpdropo[s] | Germanicus Imperator in the μη(νὶ) Σεβα(στῶι) ie. month Sebastos 15.
Endorsed in the first hand : Στοτόητι Aeowvy! εἰς τὴν νῆσον To Stotoétis, chief ῥγιθϑί,1 at τί Ὁ]. the island (9).
I give this little text, belonging to the time of the Pauline mission, as an example of the letters of commendation which St. Paul mentions more than once (2 Cor. iii. 1; x Cor. xvi. 3) and himself employed (Rom. xvi.). In the wider sense, at least, it is a letter of recommendation. The Latin letter printed below (No. 17) is an example in the narrowest sense of the word.
| The situation contained in the letter is extremely simple, but for that very reason the document has an important bearing on the disputed passage in 2 Thess. iii. 17.2 St. Paul, we are told, has not in fact furnished all his letters with a salutation in his own hand, therefore the words ‘“ which
1“ Lesonis”’ is a newly discovered title of the Egyptian priesthood, cf. Wilcken, Archiv f. Papyrusforschung, 2, p. 122; and particularly W. Spiegel- berg, Der Titel λεσῶνις, Recueil de travaux rel. ἃ la philol. égypt. et assyr. 1902, p. 187 ff. 2 Cf. p. 166, n..7 above. ᾿
Continuation of notes from page 170 :—
2 Aegyptische Urkunden aus den Koeniglichen Museen zu Berlin, Griechische Urkunden, No. 37 (with date and reading corrected, I. p. 353), cf. Bibelstudien, p. 213 [not given in Bible Studies], where the old reading is followed. For the photographs from which, with the permission of the Reichspost Museum, the facsimiles (Figs. 27, 28) were made, I am indebted to the kind offices of W. Schubart. The illustrations reduce the size of the originals by about one quarter. ᾿
8 ἴδιος, “ his own,” is used quite in the colourless Biblical sense (without any emphasis on ‘‘own’”’). Cf. Bibelstudien, p. 120f.; Bible Studies, p. 123.
4 The epistolary use of the aorist. For this whole line cf, St. Paul’s ἔπεμψα ὑμῖν Τιμόθεον, “1 have sent unto you Timotheus,” 1 Cor. iv. 17, and similar passages.” :
5 Presumably equivalent to διχήλων, and with decolorisation of the meaning, in a general sense “‘ cleft, forked.’ Hermann Diels (letter, Berlin W., 22 July, 1908) would rather take it as δισχιλίων, ‘‘ two thousand.” :
® The New Testament word [Acts i. 12, “ Olivet.” TR.], so strangely re- jected by Blass (Grammar, Eng. trans.” 32, 64, 85. TR.], cf. Neue Bibel- studien, Ὁ. 36 ff.; Bible Studies, p. 208. On the translation of εἰς by “‘ for,” cf. Bibelstudien, p. 113 ff.; Neue Bibelstudien, p. 23; Bible Studies, pp. 117, 194; this use, found in both LXX and N.T., is not Semitic, but popular Hellenistic Greek.
172 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
,
is the token in every letter’? cannot be genuine. But the premise from which this argument starts is a sheer petitio principit. We must not say that St. Paul only finished off with his own hand those letters in which he expressly says that he did.1_ Mystarion’s letter, with its greeting and the rest of the conclusion in a different writing, namely in Mystarion’s own hand, was written only a few years before St. Paul’s second letter to the Christians of Thessalonica, and it proves that somebody at that date closed a letter in his own” hand without expressly saying 50.2 It must not be forgotten that we can have no proper conception of what a letter was like unless we have seen the original; the copies in books and most certainly the printed editions have taken more from the letters of St. Paul than is generally suspected, while on the other hand they have facilitated the discussion of problems that could only have originated in the study as pure hallucina- tions in overtasked brains. The soldier Apion, whose acquaintance we shall make in letters 12 and 13, has the unsophisticated man’s natural feeling for the significance of the original handwriting of a letter: the mere sight of his father’s handwriting makes him tender and affectionate. In much the same way a contrast of handwriting awakes in St. Paul a mood half jesting and half earnest.4
9 Letter from Harmiysis, a small Egyptian farmer, to Papiscus, an official, and others, 24 July, 66 A.D., papyrus from Oxyrhynchus, now in the Cambridge University Library,
discovered and published by Grenfell and Hunt 5 (Figure 29).
This is a good example of a communication to the authorities couched in the form of a letter. The name of the addressee is politely placed at the beginning, as often in official correspondence.®
1 2 Thess. iii. 17; 1 Cor. xvi. 21; Gal. vi. 11; Col. iv. 18. ;
2 There is another good instance, I think, in a letter of the 2nd cent. a.p., Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 815; cf. Gregor Zereteli, Archiv fir Papyrusforschung, 1, p. 336 ff., and the facsimile there given.
3 In all probability, for instance, the date of writing and the address.
* Cf. Gal. vi. 11 ff., and Bibelstudien, p. 264; Bible Studies, p. 348.
5 The Oxyrhynchus Papyri (11) No. 246. A facsimile of lines 1-31 is given there in Plate VII. With the consent of the Egypt Exploration Fund I re- produce it here in slightly reduced form (Figure 29). For the text cf, also Laudien, p. 27 f. ;
6 Cf. pp. 152, 162 above, and Bibelstudien, p. 209, n. 2 [not in Bible Studies).
Fic. 29.—Letter from Harmiysis, a small Egyptian farmer, to Papiscus, an official, and others, 24 July, 66 a.p., lines 1-31. Papyrus from Oxyrhyn- chus. Now in the Cambridge University Library. By permission of the Egypt Exploration Fund.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 173
Παπίσκωι κοσμητεύφ[α(ντι)]
τῆς πόλεως καὶ στρα(τηγῶϊ)
᾿Οξυ[ρυγχί(ίτου)]
καὶ Πτολεμα(ίωι) Baorrexd[e
γρα(μματεῖ))
καὶ τοῖς γράφουσι τὸν νο[μὸν] |
5 παρὰ ᾿Αρμιύσιος τοῦ Πεῖτο-] σίριος τοῦ Πετοσίριος μ[η-] τρὸς Διδύμης τῆς Διογένους] τῶν ἀπὸ κώμης Φθώχ[ιος]
τῆς πρὸς ἀπηλιώτην το-
[π(αρχίας).]
10 ἀπεγραψάμην 3 τῶι ἐν[εσ-] τῶτι ιβ 1-- ΝέρωνοΪς] Κλαυδίου Καίσαρος Σεβαστοῦ Τερμανικοῦ Αὐτοκράτορος περὶ τὴν
15 αὐτὴν Φθώχιν ἀπὸ γ[ο-] vis ὧν ἔχω θρεμμάτων] ἄρνας δέκα δύο. καὶ νῦ[ν] ἀπογράφομαι τοὺς éx[cye-] γονότας εἰς τὴν ἐνεστί doar]
20 δευτέραν ἀπογραφὴν ἀπὸ] γονῆς τῶν αὐτῶν θρεμ[μά- τῶν ἄρνας ἑπτά, γίνονται) ἄρνες ἑπτά. καὶ ὀμν[ύω] Νέρωνα Κλαύδιον Καίσαρ[α]
25 Σεβαστὸν Τερμανικὸν
Αὐτοκράτορα μὴ ὑπεστα[λθ(αι).]
ἔξρρω(σθε).]
Τὸ Papiscus, former cos- metes of the city and now strategus of the Oxyrhynchite nome, and Ptolemaeus, royal scribe, and the writers of the nome, (5) from Harmiysis, the son of Petosiris (the son of Petosiris), his -mother being Didyme, the daughter of. Dio- genes, of the men of the village of Phthochis which is in the eastern toparchy.? (10) I- enrolled? in the present 12th year of Nero Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus Imperator, nigh unto that (15) same Phthochis, of the young of the sheep that I have, twelve lambs. And now I enrol those that have since been born, for the present (20) second enrolment; of the young of those same sheep seven lambs —they are seven lambs.? And I swear by Nero Claudius Caesar (25) Augustus Germani- cus Imperator that I have kept back nothing.
Farewell.
In another hand:
᾿Απολλώνιος ὁ π(αρὰ) Πα-
π[ίσκου]
στρατηγοῦ σεση(μείωμαι) ἄρν(ας)
é. 30 L ιβ Νέρωνος τοῦ κυρ(ῦ) [0] Ἐπεὶφ A.
I Apollonius, one of the men of 4 Papiscus the strategus, have noted 7 lambs.
(30) In the year 12 of Nero the lord, Epiph 30.
There follow, in a third and fourth hand, the signatures of the
other officials to the same effect.
The handwriting of this document is interesting on account of the clear, almost literary uncials of the main text, sharply
1 (The word translated ‘‘ province” in r Macc. xi. 28. With regard to νομός cf. Bibelstudien, p. 142 f.; Bible Studies, p. 145. TR.]
2 Technical expression for making a return.
5 I.e., “ total seven.” ‘ [J.e., ‘‘representing,” cf. p. 162, n. 3. TR.J
174 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
distinguished from the cursive signatures of the attesting officials. We must imagine this state of things reversed in the case of the Epistle to the Galatians; the handwriting of the amanuensis of Gal. i. I-vi. 10 (or —v. I) was probably cursive, and the autograph signature of St. Paul the stiff, heavy uncials of a manual labourer; the contrast was just as great. In regard to contents this text is one of the most important 1 evidences that the title Kyrios (‘‘lord’”’) was applied to the emperor as early as the reign of Nero. It is not the farmer Harmiysis who employs it, but the officials use it three times over in their formal signatures.
Io
Letter from Nearchus, an Egyptian, to Heliodorus, 1st or 2nd cent. A.D., papyrus from Egypt, now in the British Museum,
published by Kenyon and Bell? (Figure 30). Helio-
Νέαρχος a[ Nearchus .. . (to πολλῶν τοῦ aL dorus) . . . (greeting). παν ἀμνόν, τ, Since many even unto
μένων, ἵνα τὰς χε[Πρρπ[οι]ήϊτους
τέ]
5 χνας ἱστορήσωσι, ἐγὼ παρ- ἐπο[ιησ]ά-3
μὴν καὶ ἀράμενος ἀνάπλο[υν | π]αρ[α-]3
- kf ca my ed Ν
γενόμενδς τε εἴς τε Σοήνας καὶ " ‘ ὅθεν τ[υγ]χά-
νει Νεῖλος ῥέων καὶ εἰς Λιβύην ὅπου
ΜΝ a 3 ,
Appov πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις χρη- σμωδεῖ
[καὶ] εὔζσστομα 5 ἱστόρ[η]σα
* - , ν
καὶ τῶν φίλων
[ἐϊμ[ῶν τ]ὰ ὀνόματα ἐνεχάραξα τοῖς ἵ{ε-} a > i 6 ‘
pots ἀειμνήζσ)τως τὸ προσ- κύνημα
Io
[Two lines
taking ship,? that they may learn about the works made by men’s hands, (5) I have done after this sort and undertook a voyage up and came to Soéne ® and there whence the Nile flows out,9 and to Libya, where Ammon sings oracles to all men,!° (ro) and I learnt
goodly things," and I carved the names of my friends}? on the temples for a perpetual
memory, the intercession ... washed out.]
Endorsed :
Ἡλιοδόρμω. 1 Cf. Chapter IV.
| To Heliodorus.
(p. 351 ff.) below. [For notes 2 to 12 see next page.
Fic. 30.—Letter from Nearchus, an Egyptian, to Heliodorus, 1st or 2nd century, Α.Ὁ. Papyrus from Egypt. Now in the British Museum. By permission of the Museum authorities.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 175
This little fragment of a letter about travel is of great interest to the historian of civilisation. It also gives a good picture of the social piety which was already known to us from the assurances of mutual intercession in other papyrus (and Pauline) letters. Nearchus ? does not neglect to pray for his friends at the seats of grace, and, as if to make his inter- cession permanent, he inscribes their names on the temple walls.
The writer seems to be a man of the middle class, but his
1 Unfortunately nothing is known of the writer’s identity. As moreover we have no exact data concerning the provenance of the papyrus, the utmost that we can do is to suggest, without answering, the question whether this fragment may have belonged to the correspondence of the Heliodorus who is mentioned below (p. 236).
Continuation of notes from p. 174 :—
2 Greek Papyri in the British Museum (Vol. III.), London, 1907, No. 854 (p. 206); facsimile, Plate 28, here reproduced by kind permission of the British Museum (Figure 30). The letter is assigned by the editors to the first century; Grenfell and Hunt, as I was informed by Wilcken (letter, Leipzig, 13 October, 1907) would place it in the second century. The text is now accessible also in Milligan, p. 69 f.
3 Wilcken’s reading, confirmed’ by Grenfell and Hunt.
4 Ditto (omitting xa‘).
5 The papyrus has εὔτομα. The meaning would then be: “and I visited regions easily traversed ’’ (in opposition to the difficult approach to the oasis). Hermann Diels (letter, Berlin W., 22 July, 1908) writes: ‘‘etoroua = arcana, mysteria, 1 take to be a reminiscence of the Atyumriaxd of Herodotus (ii. 171), which then, as now, every traveller on the Nile had in his pocket.’’ See also Wilcken, Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung, 4, p. 554.
ὁ Grenfell and Hunt’s reading.
7 Perhaps: ‘‘ Since many now make journeys and resolve them even to 4 sea voyage.”
8. = Syene.
® With regard to the supposed source of the Nile ‘“‘ between Syene and Elephantine,’’ which occurs already in a story told to Herodotus (ii. 28) by” the temple scribe at Sais, Wilcken refers me to Dittenberger, Ovientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae, No. 168,, I. p. 243 f., and Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung 3, Pp. 326.
10 The oracle of Jupiter Ammon in the oasis of Siwah is referred to. (Cf. Major W. T. Blake, “ On Ford Cars to Siwa_Oasis,’’ Discovery, 4 (July 1923) Pp. 175-179. TR.]
11 This refers either to the impressions of the journey in general or specially to a favourable oracle of the god Ammon.
12 Inscriptions of this kind, the work of pilgrims and travellers of the Ptolemaic and Imperial periods, still exist in great numbers, cf. the Egyptian inscriptions in the Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum. They. generally contain the proskynema, a special intercession at the place of pilgrimage for absent friend and relatives. Let us hope that some of the proskynemata inscribed by Nearchus may yet be found.
“
LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
style, despite faint echoes of the book-language, is on the whole non-literary.*
176
II
Letter from Ivene, an Egyptian, to a family in mourning, 2nd
cent. A.D., papyrus from Oxyrhynchus, now in the Library
of Yale University, U.S.A., discovered and published by Grenfell and Hunt 5 (Figure 31).
Εἰρήνη Taovvadpe καὶ Φίλωνι εὐψυχεῖν.
καὶ οὕτως ἐλυπήθην ἔκλαυσα 3 ἐπὶ τῶι Γὰ Ν a eipotput,? ὡς ἐπὶ Διδυμᾶτος ν ν᾿ , “ > 5 ἔκλαυσα. καὶ πάντα ὅσα ἦν κα-
΄ὔ θήκοντα ἐποίησα καὶ πάντες
Irene to Taonnophris and Philo good comfort.
I am as sorry and weep over the departed4 one as I wept for Didymas. (5) And all things, whatsoever were fitting, I have done, and all
of «ἐμοί, Ἐπαφρόδειτος καὶ | mine, Epaphroditus and Ther- Θερμού- ' muthion and Philion and θιον καὶ Φίλιον καὶ ᾿Απολλώνιος | Apollonius and Plantas. But,
nevertheless, (10) against such
ἀλλ᾽ ὅμως οὐδὲν things one can do nothing.
καὶ Πλαντᾶς. Io δύναταί τις πρὸς τὰ τοιαῦτα.
παρηγορεῖτε οὖν ἑαυτούς. Therefore comfort ye one εὖ πράττετε. ᾿Αθὺρ a.6 | another. Fare ye well. Athyr 1.6 Endorsed :
To Taonnophris and Philo.
Ταοννώφρει καὶ Φίλωνι ρ
Philo and Taonnophris, a married pair at Oxyrhynchus, have lost a son by death, and Irene, a friend of the sorrowing mother,’ wishés to express her sympathy. She can fully
1 Eduard Norden, in a letter to me (Gross-Lichterfelde W., 3 September, 1908), disagrees with this view.
2 The Oxyrhynchus Papyri (I.), No. 115. For the facsimile (Figure 31) I am indebted to the kindness of Dr. Arthur S. Hunt. A translation is also given by Preisigke, p. 109. Text and notes in U. von Wilamowitz-Moellen- dorff, Griechisches Lesebuch, I. 23, Berlin, 1906, p. 398, and II. 22, 1902, p. 263. Cf. also Milligan p. 95 f.; Wilcken, Chrest. p. 564 f.; Helbing p. 116 ff.; Schubart, p. 63 f. 3 Epistolary use of the aorist.
4 The word was first taken as a proper name, Εὐμοίρωι. But, as pointed out by E. J. Goodspeed, the article surely shows that the word is an adjective; cf, Wilcken, Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung, 4, p. 250. I have found the word more than once as an epithet of deceased persons in early Christian inscrip- tions from Egypt (Gustave Lefebvre, Recueil des Inscriptions grecques-chré- tiennes d’Egypte, Le Caire, 1907, p. xxxi); cf. also Milligan, Selections, p. 96. This interpretation is moreover supported by the parallel τοῦ μακαρίου of the ancient letter-writer, cf. below (p. 177). [Per contra: p. 214, 1.9. Tr.].
5 Equivalent, I think, to ἀλλήλους, as often in the N.T., e.g. Col. iii. 16.
δ = 28 October.
7 That is why Irene in the letter names the mother before the father : Preisigke, p. 109.
yan AT a ΡΜ,
Fic. 31.—Letter trom Irene, an Egyptian, to a Family in Mourning, 2nd cent. A.D. Papyrus from Oxyrhynchus. Now in the Library of Yale Uni- versity. Facsimile kindly obtained by Dr. Arthur S. Hunt.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 177
understand the grief of her friends; she weeps over again the tears that she shed before for her own lost one, the departed Didymas?: personal sorrow has made her sympathetic with other people’s trouble. She speaks therefore of her own tears first. But she must write more than that: it is to be a letter of consolation. Irene, who knows how to write a business letter quickly and surely,? experiences the difficulty of those whose business it is to console and who have no con- solation to offer. And so she ponders over sentences to fill up the sheet: it will be a satisfaction to the mourners to hear that she and all her family have fulfilled all the duties of affection and decency that are customary in such cases.2 But after these lines full of names, slowly written by great effort, the genuine feeling in her heart breaks through, that despairing resignation which speaks of inevitable fates. And then, illogical and truly womanly, the concluding injunction, ‘“ Comfort ye one another !’’ Who could help feeling for the helplessness of this woman, whose own sympathy was assuredly so true?
Poor Irene! It is certainly with no wish to do her injustice that I call attention to the fact that similar formulaé of con- solation were common to the age. An ancient model letter- writer gives the following formulary 4 :—
ἡ ἐπιστολή. λίαν ἡμᾶς ἡ ἀπο | The letter. The death of N. N., now blessed, hath grieved us exceedingly and constrained us to mourn and ἠνάγκασε" τοιούτου φίλου yap σπου- weep; for of such an earnest δαίου καὶ παναρέτου éorepyOnuev. | and altogether virtuous friend δόξα οὖν καὶ αἴνεσις τῷ ἐν σοφίᾳ καὶ | have we been bereaved. Glory then and praise be to God, who in wisdom and incompre-
θανά μὰ sa fees ji hensible power and providence i κα στην ΨΥΧῊ al a governeth the issues to death,
παραλαμβάνοντι. and, when it is expedient, re- : ceiveth the soul unto Himself.
ia cel dont an - βίωσις τοῦ μακαρίου τοῦ δεῖνος
ἐλύπησε καὶ πενθεῖν καὶ δακρύειν
3 id 4 Ἂς. i ἀκαταλήπτῳ δυνάμει καὶ προνοίᾳ
κυβερνῶντι θεῷ τὰς διεξόδους τῷ
If the second half of this formulary shows signs of Biblical
1 Her husband (?) or, more probably, her son (?).
3 Cf. her letter to the same family, The Oxyrhynchus Papyri, No. 116. To judge from this, Irene was a landed proprietress. ἃ
3 Funeral offerings? Prayers? One would gladly know more.
4 Proclus,.De forma epistolari, No. 21 (Epistolographi Graeci, rec. Hercher, p. 10). The authorship of this letter-writer has been sometimes attributue
178 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
influence,! the first half is obviously ancient and secular. Irene’s letter exhibits very similar formulae, the resemblance of the opening lines being particularly striking. But it is not mere imitation; the no doubt familiar formulae are ani- mated by the personality of the writer, and we shall be justified in regarding even the concluding words of resignation as an expression of real feeling. That this feeling was a wide- spread one,? and that it produced similar thoughts in another formulary for a letter of consolation, need be no objection to the view we have taken.
St. Paul doubtless was thinking of such despairing souls in his letter to Thessalonica, when he inserted these words of comfort for the Christians in trouble for their dead * :—
“But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren,
concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope.”
And then with all the realism of an ancient popular writer he unfolds a picture of the Christian’s future hope, culminat- ing in the certainty ὅ :—
* And so shall we ever be with the Lord.”
To which he immediately adds, in conclusion, the exhorta- tion  :-
“Wherefore, comfort one another with these words,” reminding us of the ending of Irene’s letter of consolation,’ except that behind-St. Paul’s words there is not the resigna-
-tion of the ‘“‘ others’ but a victorious certitude, triumphing over death.
to Libanius, as well as to the Neo-Platonist Proclus (cf. Karl Krumbacher, Geschichte dev byzantinischen Litevatuy,? Minchen, 1897, p. 452, who rejects both attributions). I regard the text as a Christian adaptation of ancient models; cf. the Biblical intrusions noticed in the next footnote, like those in the formulary for a letter of contrition mentioned below (p. 192, on the letter of Antonis Longus).
1 Cf. the whole tenor and especially LX X Psalm Ixvii. [Ixviii.] 20, rod κυρίου ai διέξοδοι τοῦ θανάτου, “ unto the Lord belong the issues from death,” and John xiv. 3, παραλήμψομαι ὑμᾶς πρὸς ἐμαυτόν, “1 will receive you unto Myself.”
2 Wilcken recalls a saying frequent in epitaphs, ‘‘ No one is immortal.’
3 Demetrius Phalereus, Typi epistolares, No. 5 (Epistolographi, rec. Hercher,
Ῥ. 2), ἐννοηθεὶς δὲ ὅτι τὰ τοιαῦτα πᾶσίν ἐστιν ὑποκείμενα. . ., “ bearing in mind that such dispensations are laid upon us all.” 4 1 Thess. iv. 13. 5 x Thess. iv. 17. 6 x Thess. iv. 18.
7 Irene: παρηγορεῖτε οὖν ἑαυτούς. | St. Paul: dare πὰρακαλεῖτε ἀλλήλους, etc. St. Paul doubtless adopted the exhortation from the epistolary formulae of the age (cf. also 1 Thess. v. 11, and later Heb. iii. 13). The model letter of
Fic. 32.—Letter from Apion, an Egyptian soldier in the Roman Navy, to his father Epimachus, Misenum, 2nd cent. a.D. Papyrus from the Fayim. Now in the Berlin Museum. By permission of the Directors of the State
Museums.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 179
12 Letter from Apion, an Egyptian soldier in the Roman navy, to his father Epimachus, Misenum, 2nd cent. a.D., papyrus from the Fayim, now in the Berlin Museum, published by Paul Viereck 1 (Figure 32). This splendid specimen had been frequently discussed (and translated) before the first publication of this book, and it has of late received a still greater share of attention.”
3 a oR ᾿Απών Ἐπιμάχω τῶι πατρὶ καὶ 3 a , Vos , Re κυρίω ὃ πλεῖστα χαίρειν. πρὸ μὲν πάν- 23 των εὖ ioe ὑγιαίνειν ἃ καὶ διὰ ὸ a χομαί σε ὑγιαίνειν 4 καὶ διὰ παντὸς 3 ww > ΄ > a ἃ κα ἐδ Las πὸ ἃ ἐρωμένον εὐτυχεῖν μετὰ τῆς ἀδελφῆς 5 BE. μον καὶ τῆς θυγατρὸς αὐτῆς καὶ τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ = A μου. Εὐχαριστῶ ὃ τῶ κυρίω δ. Σεράπιδι, E μ ὅτι μου κινδυνεύσαιτος εἰς θάλασσαν ἴ Ca) na on 8, ἔσωσε εὐθέως 8, ὅτε εἰσῆλθον εἰς Μη- x 28) τ ae 3S σηνούςϑ, ἔλαβα 10 βιάτικον 11 παρὰ Καίσαρος 2 ᾿ os ᾿ “ . Io py 95. χρυσοῦς τρεῖς. καὶ καλῶς μοί ἐστιν. τ 3, ἐρωτῶ 13 σε οὖν, κύριέ μου πατήρ, ξ΄ . γράψον μοι ἐπιστόλιον πρῶτον με a Be μὲν περὶ τῆς σωτηρίας 13 σου, δεύ- 8 ni ia a x D τερον περὶ τῆς τῶν ἀδελφῶν μου, Ε 15 σὴ © rp[i]rov, ἵνα σου προσκυνήσω τὴν γι Ξ a & Ρ xépav 14. ὅτι με ἐπαίδευσας καλῶς | γῆς; ld 4 1 ot gs καὶ ἐκ τούτου ἐλπίζω ταχὺ προκό- - 2 σαι} τῶν θε[ῶ]ν θελόντων 186. ἄσπασαι 17 : 8 f Ha Καπίτων[α πο]λλὰ 18 καὶ to[ds] ἀδελφούς és » ne] 20 _, Ἢ Ἐς [μ]ου καὶ Σε[ρηνίϊλλαν καὶ το[ὺς] φίλους μο[ν.] ΕΝ ε΄ Ἔπεμψά oft εἰἸκόνιν 19 μίου] διὰ Εὐκτή- 2 A os. 1 povos. ἔσ[τ]ι [δέ] μου ὄνομα ᾿Αντῶνις Μά- = ες Expos 20. ξ ᾿ἘἘρρῶσθαί σε εὔχομαι. 5 ἔν κα rd g a Kevrupi(a) ᾿Αθηνονίκη 33. Dom τ ==, The address on the back: 28 oe ε[ἰς] Φ[ιλ]αδελφίαν 33 Ἐπιμ)ζ άχω ἀπὸ ᾿Απίωνος υἱοῦ. w Boo
Two lines running in the opposite direction have been added *4 : ᾿Απόδος εἰς χώρτην πρῖμαν χω Ἰ[υλι]α[ν]οῦ ᾽Αν. [. .]85
ἢ a 30 λιβλαρίω 35 ἀπὸ ᾿Απίωνος do τε Ἐπιμάχω πατρὶ αὐτοῦ.
consolation already quoted from Demetrius Phalereus, No. 5, also ends with the exhortation: καθὼς ἄλλῳ παρήνεσας, σαυτῷ παραίνεσον, “845 thou hast
admonished another, admonish now thyself.” ᾿ [For notes 1 to 26 see pages 180-182.
180 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Apion to Epimachus his father and lord? many greetings. Before all things I pray that thou art in health,4 and that thou dost prosper and fare well continually together with my sister (5) and her daughter and my brother. I thank® the lord ® Serapis that, when I was in peril in-the sea,” he saved me immediately.’ When I came to Miseni® I received as viaticum™ (journey- money) from the Caesar (10) three pieces of gold. And it is well with me. I beseech thee therefore, my lord father, write unto me a little letter, firstly of thy health, secondly of that of my brother and sister, (15) thirdly that I may-do obeisance to thy hand ™ because thou hast taught me well and I therefore hope to advance quickly, if the gods will.1® - Salute 17 Capito much 18 and my brother and sister (20) and Serenilla and my friends. I sent [07 ‘‘am sending ’’] thee by Euctemon a ‘little picture 19 of me. Moreover my name is Antonis Maximus.?° Fare thee well, I pray. Centuria Athenonica.24_ (25) There saluteth thee Serenus the son of Agathus Daemon, and... the son of... and Turbo the son of Gallonius and Ὁ... .Jnas the son of [. . .]sen
[essl anes
The address on the back : (28) To Philadelphia 38 for Epim Kachus from Apion his son.
Two lines running in the opposite direction have been added * :
Give this to the first a, ὦ the Apamenians to (?) Julianus An. . .%5
(30) the Liblarios,?* from Apion so that (he may convey it) to Epimachus his father.
Notes to pages 179 and 180 :— °
1 Aegyptische Urkunden aus den Koeniglichen Museen zu Berlin (11.), No. 423 (cf. II. p. 356). For the photograph here facsimiled by kind permission of the Directors of the State Museums at Berlin, Iam indebted to W. Schubart. The figure is about one-third smaller than the original.
3. Cf. Viereck in his article in the Vossische Zeitung; Erman and Krebs, p. 214 f.; Cagnat, p. 796; Preisigke, p. 101 f.; Lietzmann,? p.4f.; Milligan, p. 90 ff.; Wilcken, Chrestomathie, Ὁ. 65f.; Helbing, p. roo ff.; Schubart; p. 79 (see also the full-sized facsimile, recto and verso, in his Tabulae, No. 28).
3 Lord, here and in 1, 11, is a child’s respectful form of address.
* A frequent formula in papyrus letters, cf. Bibelstudien, Ὁ. 214 (not in Bible Studies), and the similar formula in 3: John 2, περὶ πάντων εὔχομαί σε εὐοδοῦσθαι καὶ ὑγιαίνειν, “1 pray that in all things thou mayest prosper and be in health.” Misunderstanding this formula, many commentators on
{For continuation of notes see next page.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 181
Apion, son of Epimachus, of the little Egyptian village of Philadelphia, has entered the Roman army as a marine,! and after the farewells to father, brothers and sisters, and
1 Cf. Preisigke, p. τοὶ ff., and Wilcken, Chrestomathie, p. 565.
Continuation of notes to pages 179 and 180.
the Third Epistle of St. John have assumed that Gaius, the addressee, had been ill immediately before.
5 This is a thoroughly ‘“‘ Pauline ” way of beginning a letter, occurring also elsewhere in papyrus letters (cf. for instance Bibelstudien, p. 210; it is not given in Bible Studies). St. Paul was therefore adhering to a beautiful secular custom when he so frequently began his letters with thanks to God (τ Thess. i. 2; 2 Thess. i. 3; Col. i. 3; Philemon 4; Eph. i. 16; 1 Cor. i. 4; Rom, i. 8; Phil. i. 3).
δ Serapis is called Jord in countless papyri and inscriptions.
1 Cf. St. Paul’s “ perils in the sea,” 2 Cor. xi. 26, κινδύνοις ἐν θαλάσσῃ. The Roman soldier writes more vulgarly than St. Paul, εἰς θάλασσαν instead of ἐν θαλάσσῃ.
8 Cf. St. Peter in peril of the sea, Matt. xiv. 30 f., ‘ beginning to sink, he cried, saying, Lovd, save me. And immediately Jesus stretched forth His hand .. .” (ἀρξάμενος καταποντίζεσθαι ἔκραξεν λέγων: κύριε, σῶσόν με. εὐθέως δὲ ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς ἐκτείνας τὴν χεῖρα. . .). One sees the popular tone of the evangelist’s narrative : he and the Roman soldier are undoubtedly following the style of popular narratives of rescue.
® There are other instances of this plural form of the name of the naval harbour, generally called Mzsenum, near Naples.
10 This form is one of the many vulgarisms found also in the New Testament, cf. Neue Bibelstudien, Ὁ. 19; Bible Studies, p. 191.
11 The viaticum is aptly compared by Preisigke with the marching allowances in the Germanarmy. It consists of three pieces of gold (aure?) =75 drachmae. Alfred von Domaszewski writes to me (postcard, Heidelberg, 6 August, 1908) : “The viaticum (cf. Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum, VIII. No. 2557) is a stipendium.” For the orthography of the word Lionel R. M. Strachan refers me to H. I. Bfell] in Notes and Queries, 11th Ser., vii. 283 f. (12 April, 1913).
12 Again the ‘‘ Biblical’ word.
13 σωτηρία here means ‘‘ welfare’ in the external (not in the religious) sense, as in Acts xxvii, 34, Heb. xi. 7.
14 yépav = χεῖρα, with vulgar » appended, like χεῖραν in John xx. 25, Codices X* AB; other examples in Blass, Grammatik des Neutestamentlichen Griechisch,? p. 27 [Eng. trans. p. 26].—By hand I think Apion means his father’s handwriting, which will recall his father’s presence. A specially fine touch in this letter of fine feeling.
15 προκόσαι no doubt = προκόψαι, “ to advance,” as in Luke ii. 52, Gal. i. 14. The soldier is thinking of promotion. Fine parallels, especially to Luke ii. 52, in Dittenberger, Sylloge,? No. 3251, (#708), Istropolis, before 100 B.c., [τῇ] τε ἡλικίᾳ προκόπτων Kal προαγόμενος εἰς τὸ θεοσεβεῖν (cf. Milligan, p. 91).
16 The pious reservation ‘‘if the gods will’ is frequent in pagan texts, cf. Neue Bibelstudien, p. 80; Bible Studies, p. 252.
17 The writers of papyrus letters often commission greetings to various
[For continuation of notes see next page
182 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
friends, has taken ship (probably at Alexandria) for Misenum. Serenus, Turbo, and other recruits from the same village accompany him. The voyage is rough and dangerous. In dire peril of the sea the young soldier invokes his country’s god, and the lord Serapis rescues him immediately. Full of gratitude, Apion reaches his first destination, the naval port of Misenum. It is a new world to the youth from the distant Egyptian village! Put into the centuria with the high-sounding name “‘ Athenonica,”’ with three pieces of gold from the Emperor in his pocket as viaticum, and proud of
Continuation of notes to pages 179 and 180 :—
persons, and often convey them from others (1. 25), just as St. Paul does in most of his letters.
18 Cf, the same epistolary formula in 1 Cor. xvi. 19.
19 The reading here used to be σίοι τὸ ὀθ]όνιν, ‘the linen,” which was understood to refer to Apion’s civilian clothes. Wilcken has re-examined the passage in the original, and made the charming discovery that Apion sent his father his [εἰϊκόνιν (= εἰκόνιον), “little picture ’’ (results communicated to me in letters, Florence, 20 April, 1907, Leipzig, 5 May, 1907). It is just like German recruits getting themselves photographed as soon as they are allowed out of barracks alone.
20 On entering the Roman naval service Apion, not being a Roman, received a Roman name. Antonis is short for Antonius. The passage has an impor- tant historical bearing on the subject of changing names, ef. Harnack, Militia Christi, Die christliche Religion und der Soldatenstand in den ersten drei Jahrhunderten, Tiibingen, 1905, p. 35; and Die Mission und Ausbrettung des Christentums in den ersten drei Jahrhunderten,? Leipzig, 1915, I., p. 410 (Moffatt’s trans. 21905, p. 38n.). There will be found a neat analogy to the present instance: Tarachus, a Christian soldier, says, "a parentibus dicor Tarachus, et cum militarem nominatus sum Victor.”
21 The name of his company, given no doubt as part of the correct address to be used in answering. ;
22 New reading by Wilcken.
23 Philadelphia in the Fayam.
24 The crosses mark the place for tying up the letter when folded (Wilcken, Chrestomathie, p. 566). The cohort mentioned in these instructions for delivery was stationed in Egypt (Preisigke, p. 102), The letter therefore went first of all from the garrison of Misenum to the garrison of this cohort (Wilcken : Alexandria), and the Liblarios (= librarius, cf. note 26), i.e. accountant to the cohort, was then to forward it, as occasion should serve, to the village in the Fayim.
25 George Milligan informed me (postcard, Murthly, 7 April, 1910) that Sir W. M. Ramsay considered it possible we ought to read ἀν[τι]λιβλαρίω (pro librario).
26 On this borrowed word, which also forced itself into Jewish usage in the form liblay, cf. Blau, Papyri und Talmud, pp. 17 and 27. I agree with Blau in thinking that Abvarius (the y becoming /), and not /ibellavius (as Wilcken and others suppose) is the source.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 183
his new name, Antonis Maximus, he immediately has his portrait painted for the people at home by some artist who makes a living in the taverns about the docks. And now he writes off to his father a short account of all that has hap- pened. The letter shows him in the best of spirits; a rosy future lies before Apion: he will soon get promotion, thanks to his father’s excellent training. When he thinks of it all, of his father, and his brother, and his sister with her little daughter, and Capito and his other friends, his feelings are almost too much for him. If only he could press his father’s hand once again! But there, father will send him a note in reply, and his father’s handwriting will call up the old home. The letter is just about to be closed when his countrymen give him their cheery greetings to send, and there is just room for them on the margin of the papyrus. Finally the letter must be addressed, and that is a little troublesome: in the army there are rules and regulations for everything, but to make up for it the soldier’s letter will be forwarded by military post to Egypt, and by way of the Liblarios’ room of the first Apamenian cohort it will reach the father in safety.
Have I read too much between the lines of this letter? I think not. With letters you must try to understand what is written between the lines. Nobody will deny that this soldier’s letter of the second century, with its fresh naiveté, rises high above the average level.
We possess further the original of a second, somewhat later letter by the same writer, addressed to his sister,1 which was also found in the Fayim, and is now in the Berlin Museum. I believe I am able to restore a few lines additional to those already deciphered.
1 See letter 13 below.
184 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
13
A second letter from the same soldier (Apion, now) Antonius Maximus, to his sister Sabina, 2nd cent. A.D., papyrus from the Faydim, now in the Berlin Museum, published by Fritz Krebs ἢ
(Figure 33). *Ar[rdvi]os Μάξιμος Σαβίνη Antonius Maximus to Sabina
τῇ ἀ[δ]ελφῆ 3 πλεῖστα χαίρειν. | his sister * many greetings.
Before all things I pray that
¥ , πρὸ μὲν πάντων εὔχομαί
ὅε ὑγιαίνειν, καὶ ᾽γὼ γὰρ αὐτὸς thou art in health, for I myself 5 ὑγιαίνζω]. Mviav cov ποιούμε. | also (5) am in health. Making νος 3 mapa τοῖς [ἐν]θάδε θεοῖς 4 mention of thee? before the ἐκομισάμην [ἐ]ν 5 ἐπι[σἸτόλιον gods here 4 I received a 5 little παρὰ Avtwre[t]vov τοῦ συν- letter from Antoninus our
πολ[ε]ίτου ἡμῶν. καὶ ἐπιγνούς fellow-citizen. And when I
IO ce ἐρρωμένὴν λίαν ἐχάρην.5 knew (10) that thou farest well,
καὶ ᾽γὼ διὰ πᾶσαν ἀφορμὴν I rejoiced greatly.6 And I at o[d]y ὀκνῶ σοι γράψαι περὶ every occasion delay not to τῆῇ[ς] σωτηρίας μου καὶ τῶν write unto thee concerning the ἐμῶν. Ασπασαι Md£ipov? health of me and mine. Salute
15 πολλὰ καὶ Κοπρὴν 8 τὸν κύρινϑ | Maximus? (15) much, and μίου. ἀ]σπάζεταί σε ἡ σύμβι- Copres® my lord. There ὅς [μου ΑἸὐφιδία καὶ [Μ]άξιμος | saluteth thee my life’s partner,
6 vids pov, [οὗ] ἐστὶ[ν] τὰ | Aufidia, and Maximus my 19 yeve son, whose birthday is the 301} [ova ἘΠπεὶπ τριακὰς καθ᾽ “Ἔλ- Epip according to Greek reckon-
20 [Anva]s, καὶ Ἐλπὶς καὶ Φορτου- 11 | ing, (20). and Elpis and Fortu-
[vara]. Ασπζα]σαι τὸν κύριον nata. Salute my lord...
1 Aegyptische Uvkunden aus den Koeniglichen Museen zu Berlin (I1.), No. 632, published by Fritz Krebs; partly translated by Erman and Krebs, p. 215, and by Preisigke, p. 103. For the facsimile (Figure 33, about ¢ of the size of the original) I am indebted to the kindness of W. Schubart.
2 The sistey was named in the first letter. Her daughter, not being named in the second letter, had probably died meanwhile. It is not likely that Sabina was a second sister of the writer, because in the first letter only one sister is mentioned. The father too seems not to have been alive at the time of the second letter.
3 Assurance of intercession for the receiver at the beginning of the letter is a pious usage with ancient letter-writers (cf. Ziemann, pp. 317 ff. and 321 ff.); intercession for the receiver can, however, be traced back to the East in very ancient times (Joh. Theiss, Altbabylonische Briefe, Teil I, a Berlin dissertation, Leipzig, 1913, p. 8 ff.). In exactly the same way as our soldier, St. Paul writes μνείαν cov ποιούμένος, Philemon 4; cf. 1 Thess. i. 2, Eph. i. 16, Rom. i. 9 f., 2 Tim. i. 3; and see Brbelstudien, p. 210 (not in Bible Studies).— The participial clause can also be taken with ὑγιαίνω (so Wilcken),
4 Where Antonius Maximus was at the time is not known. Alfred von Domaszewski suggests Alexandria to me (postcard, Heidelberg, 6 August,
[For continuation of notes see next page.
20
25
28
Fic. 33.—Letter from (Apion, now) Antonius Maximus, an Egyptian soldier in the Roman Navy, to his sister Sabina, 2nd cent. a.D. Papyrus from the Fayim. Now in the Berlin Museum. By permission of the Directors of the State Museums. (ξ of the size of the original).
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 185
There follow 6 mutilated lines, obviously containing more salu- tations. 28 [ἐρρῶσθαί σε εὔχο]μαι. | (28) Fare thee well, I pray. On the verso the address :
[SaBin] ἀΓδε]λφ[ἢ] ar [0] To Sabina his sister, from ᾿Αντ[ω]νίου Μαξίμ[ο]ν ἀδελ- | Antonius Maximus her brother. φ[οὔ].
I imagine the situation in this second letter to be as
follows :—
Continuation of notes to page 184 :—
1908). The soldier now serves the gods of the place where he is garrisoned, as formerly he had served the lord Serapis of his native country; and this is not without analogies, cf. the worship of local gods in the Roman army, von Domaszewski, Die Religion des rémischen Heeves, Trier, 1895, p. 54 ff., and the letter of Athenodorus, a soldier (papyrus No. 20 in the collection of the Berlin University New Testament Seminar, in P.M. Meyer’s Griechische Texte, p. 82 ff.), who prays for his “ sister ’’ to the gods in the foreign country where he is.
5 ἕν =the indefinite article, a popular usage often found in the New Testament, for which, according to Blass, Grammatik des Neutestamentlichen Griechisch,? p. 145 [Eng. trans. p. 144], Hebrew afforded a precedent. Well- hausen, Einlectung in die drei ersten Evangelien, p. 27, explains it as an Aramaism. As a matter of fact this usage of popular Greek, which has been still further developed in Modern Greek, is parallel to the Semitic, Teutonic ~ and Romance usages.
8 Nav ἐχάρην is an epistolary formula like ἐχάρην λίαν in 2 John 4 and 3 John 3.
7 Maximus is probably the sister’s son, who would then be named after his uncle.
® Copres is probably the brother-in-law.
® On κύρις (= κύριος) see Thumb, Die griechische Sprache im Zeitalter des Hellenismus, p. 154.
10 So I have restored lines 18-21. I have altered nothing except zew to ver in line 19. Ene is the month ᾿Επείφ; for the spelling with final π cf. the examples in Wilcken, Griechische Ostraka, I. p. 809. καθ᾽ Ἕλληνας, “ according to the Hellenic (i.e. not Egyptian) calendar,” is a technical formula; cf. the 2nd cent. horoscope, Fayim Towns and their Papyvi, No. 139, καθ᾽ “Ελληνας Mecopy ε, and the editors’ note; also Wilcken, Griechische Ostvaka, I. p. 792 ff. The nominative τριακάς is grammatically unimpeachable, for it is a predicate and not a statement of time (‘‘ on the thirtieth ’’), Even in the latter case, however, the nominative is occasionally left, e.g. Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 55, II, (161 A.D.), 64:4. (216-217 A.D.). For the prominence given to the birthday cf. for instance Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 333, 2nd or 3rd cent. a.D. (Bibelstudien, p. 215; not in Bible Studies).—W. Schubart informed me by letter (Berlin, 6 June, 1907) that my conjectures fit in well with the traces of letters remaining and with the size of the lacunae in the papyrus; he approves also, in spite of doubts suggested by the hand- writing, the reading πειπ.
11 Krebs wrote ἐλπίς and φόρτου. I regard both as proper names; of course one could also conjecture Fortunatus (cf. 1 Cor. xvi. 17). As the son Maximus has ‘been already named, with special stress laid on his birthday, one is rather inclined to assume in 1. 20 f. that the writer had two daughters.
186 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
* Years have passed. Apion, who has long ago discarded this name and now uses only his soldier-name Antonius Maximus, has taken a wife, called Aufidia. She presents him with two daughters, Elpis and Fortunata (the parents delight in beautiful names with a meaning), and at last the longed-for son and heir. His birthday, according to the Greek calendar, is 30 Epiph (24 July), and the soldier’s child receives his father’s splendid soldier-name, Maximus. Changes too have taken place at home, in the far-away little village of Phila- delphia, in Egypt. The sister Sabina has lost her little daughter; lord father Epimachus has also died; but Sabina and her husband Copres have got a little boy instead, who is named Maximus in honour of his soldier uncle: is not uncle’s portrait, left them by grandfather, hanging on the wall? Sabina . is the link between her brother and his old home. He writes as often as he can, and when he cannot write he remembers his sister daily before the gods of his garrison in brotherly intercession. But this is not his only connexion with home. An old friend in Philadelphia, Antoninus, has just written, and was kind enough to assure him of Sabina’s being well.
That is the occasion of the letter to the sister. Written in a perfectly familiar strain, simply to impart family news and to convey all sorts of greetings, it nevertheless, like that other letter of richer content to the father, gives us a glimpse of the close net of human relationships, otherwise invisible, which the giant hands of the Roman army and navy had woven with thousands of fine, strong threads and spread from coast to coast and from land to land over the enormous extent of the Mediterranean world at the time of the infancy of Christianity. In judging of the Roman army of the second century it is not without importance to know that among the human materials of which that mighty organism was composed, there were such attractive personalities as our friend Apion. Another soldier’s letter (No. 17), given below, also permits favourable conclusions to be drawn.1
1 Other soldiers’ letters, sometimes highly characteristic, are forthcoming among the papyri. Preisigke, p. 99 ff., translates the unblushing begging- letter of a soldier to his mother, 3rd cent. a.p., Berliner Griechische Urkun- den, No. 814. Cf. also a letter now in the New Testament Seminar, Berlin, from Athenodorus to his “‘ sister," published by P. M. Meyer, Griechische Texte aus Aegypten, No. 20.
τα. 34.—Letter from a Prodigal Son, Antonis Longus, to his mother Nilus, 2nd cent. A.D. Papyrus from the Fayam. Now in the Berlin Museum. By permission of the Directors of the State Museums.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 187
14 Leiter from a prodigal son, Antonis Longus, to his mother Nilus, Faytm, 2nd cent. A.p., Dapyr is. now in the Berlin Museum, published by Fr. Krebs ? and W. Schubart ? (Figure 34).
᾿Αντῶνις ® Advyos Νειλοῦτι [τ]ῦ μητρὶ π[λ]ῖστα as καὶ δι- ὰ révrely] εὔχομαί oat ὑγειαίνειν. τὸ προσκύνη- μά σου [ποι]ῶ κατ᾽ αἱκάστην ἡμαίραν παρὰ τῶ 5. κυρίω [Σερ]άπειδει.ὅ γεινώσκειν σαι θέλω, ὅ-
τι οὐχ [ἤλπΊ]ιζον,Ἷ ὅτι ἀναβένις εἰς τὴν μητρό- πολιν. χ[ά]ρειν τοῦτο ὃ οὐδ᾽ ἐγὸ εἰσῆθα 10 εἰς τὴν πό- λιν. αἰδ[ υ]φοποζύμην 1 δὲ ἐλθεῖν εἰς Καρανίδαν 13 ὅτι σαπρῶς παιριπατῶ. αἴγραψά 13 σοι, ὅτι γυμνός
IO εἰμει. παρακα[λ]ῶ 14 σαι, μήτηρ, δ[ι]αλάγητί μοι.15 λοι- πὸν 15 οἶδα τί [ποτ᾿] 17 αἰμαυτῶ παρέσχημαι. παιπαίδ δευμαι 18 καθ᾽ ὃν δὲ 19 τρόπον. οἶδα, ὅτι ἡμάρτηκα.20 ἤκουσα Tapa το[ῦ Ποστ]ούμου 31 τὸν εὑρόντα 32 σαι ἐν τῶ ᾿Αρσαινοείτη 33 καὶ ἀκαιρίως πάντα σοι δι-
15 ἥγηται. οὐκ οἶδες, ὅτι θέλω 33 πηρὸς γενέσται, 2 εἰ 38 γνοῦναι,27 ὅπως 28 ἀνθρόπω 28 [ἤτ[ ὀφείλω ὀβολόν;
[ccs ee ὁ καὶ οτος νας oe es Job αὐτὴ ἐλθέ. Dein ef eee oa ee eg Ἰχανκ [ . . . Jov ἤγουσα, ὅτι. [roi Balch oes Geel iol eka 1. λησαι . . ] παρακαλῶ σαι 20 [bes ae eee κεν ee ae eae Dea vole 7. αἰγὼ σχεὸν [sree ae ates Aine Goes aie Bar ie ay Gn κα, ὧν ao Ὁ 7 @ παρακαλῶ gay [ares gs ναῶν Seen Sat ale Ἰωνου θέλω αἰγὼ ΠΤ ΟΣ eae Joan... . οὐκ ξ, [λεὺς Sh Ds Gs GAGTAT AR Bama gL at, te J]... . ἄλλως rofl. ] Here the papyrus breaks off. On the back is the address : ἔξ: aes ] μητρεὶ ἀπ’ "Ἀντωνίῳ ‘Aovyov ὑειοῦ. 1 Aegyptische ‘Urkunden aus den Koeniglichen Museen zu Berlin (III.), No. 846.
3 Ibid. Heft 12, p. 6. Some conjectures by me are given below. The photograph used for the facsimile (Fig. 34) here given by the kind permis- sion of the Directors of the State Museums was obtained for me by W. Schubart. Preisigke, p. 99, translated the letter in part and spoke, as I do, of the writer as a “‘ prodigal son.” Later reprints of the text in Lietzmann,? p. 5; Milligan, p. 93 ff. (who has also given a facsimile in the Journal of the Transactions of the Victoria Institute, vol. 44, London, 1912, p. 76); Helbing, p. 110 ff.
® Antonis, short for Antonius, cf. letter 12 above, p. 179.
* gat = oe. Numerous repetitions of this word and similar cases are not specially noted.
5 This sentence, occurring in innumerable papyrus letters, is the stereo-
typed form of assurance of mutual intercession. [For continuation of notes see pages 188-190,
188 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
There can be no doubt that this letter is one of the most interesting human documents that have come to light among the papyri. This priceless fragment, rent like the soul of its writer, comes to us asa remarkably good illustration of the parable of the Prodigal Son (Luke xv. 11 ff.).1. Others may improve on the first attempt at interpretation.
Antonis 3 Longus to Nilus his mother many greetings. And continually do I pray that thou art in health. - I make intercession for thee day by day to the (5) lord Serapis.5 I would thou shouldst understand ® that I had no hope that thou wouldst go up to the metropolis. And therefore I came not to the city. But I was ashamed to come to Caranis,!2 because I walk about in rags. I write [or “ have written ᾿ 15] to thee that I am naked. (10) I beseech thee,!4 mother, be reconciled to me.1® Furthermore, I know what I have brought upon myself. I have been chastened 18 even as is meet. I know that I have sinned.2°. I have heard from Postumus,21 who met thee in the country about Arsinoé and out of season told thee all things. (15) Knowest thou not that I had rather be maimed than know that I still owe a man an obol? .... come thyself! .... 1 have heard that.... I beseech thee . . . . (20) I almost . . . . I beseech thee .
I will .... not... . do otherwise.
Here the papyrus breaks off. On the back is the address : ἜΣ 1 his mother, from Antonius Longus her son.
1 If this letter had happened to be preserved in some literary work there would of course be a number of monographs, proving the parable to be derived from the letter, and many a doctoral dissertation would have been made out of it.
Continuation of notes to pages 187 and 188 :—
6 Epistolary formula, occurring also in St. Paul, Phil. i. 12 (with βούλομαι). Other like formulae are frequent in the Pauline Epistles.
7 ἥλπιζον = ἤλπιζον with the vulgar aspirate, as in the New Testament instances ἀφελπίζω and ἐφ᾽ ἑλπίδι (Blass, Grammatik des Neutestamentlichen Griechisch,? p. 17, *p. 11 §14 [Eng. trans. p. 15]). W. Schubart examined the original expressly and assured me by letter (Berlin, 14 June, 1907) that my conjectured restoration of the text is quite feasible.
8 The metropolis is perhaps Arsinoé.
91 used toexplain this as = χάριν τούτου (as Schubart also did in a letter to me). In the papyri this prepositional χάριν often stands before its case; cf. for instance a passage, somewhat similar to the present one, in the letter of Gemellus to Epagathus, 104 a.D., Fayitm Towns and theiv Papyvi, No. 11669, ἐπὶ [= ἐπεὶ] βουλεύωμαι [εἰς π]όλιν ἀπελθῖν χάριν [τοῦ] μικροῦ καὶ χάριν ἐκί[νου] τοῦ μετυώρουι. But Nachmanson, Eranos 11 (1912) p. 225 ff., is probably right in assuming here a vulgarism, χάριν governing the accusative.
[For notes 10-23 see next page.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 189
Antonius Longus,! of Caranis in the Fayam, has quarrelled with his (widowed ?) 5 mother Nilus and left the village. The
1 The name Antonius Longus occurs elsewhere: as the name of a veteran (M. Antonius Longus Pull<us>) on a diptych of the time of Domitian from the ruins of Philadelphia, reproduced in Appendix VI; again in a communica- tion from Herais, a woman of Theadelphia in the Fayam, to the decadarch Antonius Longus (2nd cent. a.p.), Hamburg papyrus No. 10,. Anyone with surplus imagination might conjecture family connexions or even identity with the writer of our letter: Antonius Longus, the son of a worthy veteran in the Fayam, becomes, after a very ill-spent youth, something respectable after all. Thus we should have a nice moral epilogue to the letter. But my advice is: curb the imagination.
3 Otherwise there would surely have been some mention of the father.
Continuation of notes to pages 187 and 188.
10 = ἐγὼ εἰσῆλθα.
111 at first conjectured ἐν[εἸκοπ[τό]μην, “1 was hindered,” as in Rom. xv. 22. From the photograph Wilcken and I came to the conjecture given above = ἐδυσωπούμην, “1 was ashamed.” This word, which gives excellent sense, is found more than once in translations of the Old Testament; in the letter of Gemellus to Epagathus, 99 a.D., Fayim Towns and their Papyri, No. 112,93 and in another letter, Oxyrhynchus Papyri, No. 128,, 6th or 7th cent. a.D. Further particulars in the Thesaurus Graecae Linguae. W. Schubart, writing to me from Berlin, 3 October, 1907, proposed after fresh examination of the original κατ[εἸσκοπούμην. But that, I think, would not makesense. Schubart’s reading, however, is a warning to be cautious in accepting mine.
12 Caranis (a village in the Fayim) was probably the writer’s home and the residence of his mother.
13 Refers probably to the present letter.
“4 This verb, which occurs several times here, is used exactly as in the New Testament,
15. Cf, Matt. v. 24, διαλλάγηθι τῷ ἀδελφῷ σου, “ be reconciled to thy brother,” and in the charming letter (‘‘if we could fly! ’’) written by Tays (a woman) to Apollonius (Giessen papyrus No. 17,3, of the time of Hadrian; also in Wilcken, Chrestomathie, p. 566), διαλλάγηθι ἡμεῖν, where it rather means ‘‘ be no more angry with us.”
186 Adverbial, without article, as in 2 Tim. iv. 8, 1 Thess. iv. 1.
17 The restoration of the text is uncertain.
18 The word is used exactly in the ‘‘ Biblical’ sense of ‘‘ chasten,’’ which according to Cremer, Biblisch-theologisches Wévterbuch,® p. 792, is “ entirely unknown to profane Greek.”
18 J used to take δι 85 = δή. Virtually καθ᾽ ὃν δὴ τρόπον = καθ᾽ ὅντινα οὖν τρόπον, 2 Macc. xiv. 3, 3 Macc. vii. 7. But Wilcken makes a better suggestion : δῖ = δεῖ. The reading δίτροπος, ‘‘ with two souls,’ can hardly be entertained.
20 Cf. the Prodigal Son, Luke xv. 18, 21, " Father, I have sinned.” .
21 ΤῈ is best to assume some proper name here, I at first thought of [Δι]δύμου, but I now prefer the reading adopted above, although the space is somewhat small for so many letters. The name Postumus occurs often in the Berlin papyri, but must remain doubtful here.
#2 The construction is grammatically incorrect, but such cases are frequent in letters. Preisigke (p. 99) translates the sentence differently.
23 “' Nome,” ‘ district,’’ must be understood.
[For notes 24 to 28 see next page.
Igo LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
cause of the dissension seems to have lain with the son— loose living, and running up debts.1 It fares ill with him in the strange country; he is in such wretched plight that his clothes fall from him in rags. In such a state, he says to himself with burning shame,’ it is impossible for him to return home. But he must go back—he realises that, for he had soon come to his senses: all this misery he has brought upon himself by his own fault, and it is the well-deserved punishment. Full of yearning for home he remembers his mother in prayer daily to the lord Serapis, and hopes for an opportunity of re-establishing communication with her. Then he meets an acquaintance of his, Postumus (?). He hears how Postumus (?) had met his mother in the Arsinoite nome, as she was returning home from the metropolis, Arsinoé (to Caranis), and how the poor woman had hoped to find her son at the metropolis. Unfortunately Postumus (9) recounted to the disappointed mother the whole scandalous story of the runaway once more, reckoning up his debts for her edification to the last obol.
1 Cf. Castor of Hermopolis, the dissolute fellow whose disgraceful life is made the subject of bitter complaint by his parents in a communication to the strategus Heraclides (Florence papyrus No. 99, 1st or 2nd cent. a.D.; also in Milligan, p. 71 f.).
2 The word, if rightly read, is extraordinarily expressive. An ancient lexicographer says, δυσωπεῖσθαι ἀντὶ τοῦ ὑφορᾶσθαι καὶ φοβεῖσθαι καὶ μεθ᾽ ὑπονοίας σκυθρωπάζειν, “ἴμ6 word δυσωπεῖσθαι means ‘to stand with downcast eyes,’ ‘to be fearful,’ and figuratively ‘to look sad and gloomy ’”’ (see the Thesaurus Graecae Linguae). The position reminds one of Luke xviii. 13, says Heinrich Schlosser (postcard to the author, Wiesbaden, 2 July, 1908).
Continuation of notes to pages 187 and 188 :—
324 θέλω with following ἢ papyrus (εἴ, “1 had rather... than...,’” is used exactly like this in 1 Cor. xiv. 19.
25 The first editors read παρασγενεσται, which I at first took for παρασιαίνεσθαι ("οιγαίνω = σιαίνω, as ὑγιγαίνω = ὑγιαίνω, Karl Dieterich, Untersuchungen zur Geschichte dev griechischen Sprache, p. 91 1). With the photograph to help me I read πῃρος. Schubart tells me (letter, 3 October, 1907) this reading is
possible, 26 .. q 37 = γνῶναι.
28 This reading was also approved by Schubart (letter, 3 October, 1907) after inspecting the original. ὅπως is used vulgarly like πῶς = ὡς = ὅτι (Blass, Grammatik des Neutestamentlichen Griechisch,? Ὁ. 2351. 5p. 222 f. § 396 (Eng. trans. pp. 230-1]; Hatzidakis, Einleitung in die neugriechische Gram- matik, p. 19), e.g. Mark xii. 26, ἀνέγνωτε... ., πῶς εἶπεν αὐτῷ ὁ θεός (quotation follows), and many other passages. I find this use of ὅπως beginning in Luke xxiv. 20.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE τοι
That is the occasion of the letter: gratitude to the mother for having looked for him, as he had not ventured to hope, in the metropolis—and anger at Postumus (?) the scandal- monger. The letter is dashed off in a clumsy hand and full of mistakes, for Antonius Longus has no practice in writing. The prodigal approaches his mother with a bold use of his pet name Antonis, and after a moving description of his misery there comes a complete confession of his guilt and a passionate entreaty for reconciliation. But in spite of everything, he would rather remain in his misery, rather become a cripple, than return home and be still one single obol in debt to the usurers. The mother will understand the hint and satisfy the creditors before the son’s return. And then she is to come herself and lead her son back into an ordered way of life. . . . ‘I beseech thee, I beseech thee, I will. .... is —no more than this is recoverable of the remainder of the letter, but these three phrases in the first person are sufficiently characteristic. Antonius has a foreboding that there is still resistance to be overcome.?
Astute persons and models of correct behaviour will tell us that the repentance of this black sheep was not genuine; that sheer poverty and nothing else wrung from him the con- fession of sin and the entreaty for reconciliation; that the lines assuring his mother of his prayers to Serapis were mere phrasing. But was not the prodigal’s confession in the Gospel parable also dictated by his necessity? Jesus does not picture to us an ethical virtuoso speculating philosophically and then reforming, but a poor wanderer brought back to the path by suffering. Another such wanderer was Antonius Longus the Egyptian, who wrote home in the depths of his misery: “I beseech thee, mother, be reconciled to me! I know that I have sinned.”
We see very plainly how genuine and true to life it all is when we compare the tattered papyrus sheet with a specimen letter of contrition, ship-shape and ready for use, as drafted by an ancient model letter-writer 3 :—
-
1 A somewhat different explanation of the letter is attempted by Ad. Matthaei, in the Preussische Jahrbiicher, January 1909, p. 133 f.
3 Proclus, De forma epistolari, No. 12. (Epistolographi Graeci, rec. Hercher, Pp. 9). Cf. the note on letter No. 8 above, p. 177, 0. 4.
102 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
ἡ ἐπιστολή. οἶδα σφαλεὶς κακῶς The letter. I know that I σε διαθέμενος. διὸ μεταγνοὺς τὴν | erred in that I treated thee ill. ἐπὶ τῷ σφάλματι συγγνώμην αἰτῶ. | Wherefore, having repented, I μεταδοῦναι δέ μοι μὴ κατοκνήσῃς διὰ | beg pardon for the error. But τὸν κύριον.2 δίκαιον γάρ ἐστι ovy- | for the Lord’s sake! delay not γινώσκειν πταίουσι τοῖς φίλοις, ὅτε | to forgive me. For it is just μάλιστα καὶ ἀξιοῖσι συγγνώμης | to pardon friends who stumble, τυχεῖν. and especially when they desire to obtain pardon.”
The person who calls himself “I” in this letter is a lay- figure, and not even a well-made one; when Antonis Longus says “1 do this or that ”’ a man of flesh and blood is speaking. His affecting acknowledgments—more genuine perhaps than the contrite wording of Lydian and Phrygian expiatory inscriptions or the conventional sentence employed by Justinus 4 the Christian—would lose naught of their inward truth if his “1 know that I have sinned’ had been as much a current formula as the “1 know that I erred.” The prodigal had gone through experiences enough to animate even formulae into confessions.
15 and τό.
Letters from Sempronius, an Egyptian, to his mother. Saturnila and his brother Maximus, Alexandria (?), second half of the and cent. A.D., papyrus, now in the British Museum, published by H. I. Bell 5 (Figure 35).
Σεμπρώνιος Σατουρνίλα τῆ μητρεὶ 13 καὶ κυρία 5 πλεῖστα «χαίρειν.
Moan ὅλ, 2A “7 " 8 N 1,9 On πρὸ τῶν OAWY ἐρρῶσθέ σε εὐχομαι“ μετὰ και" τῶν
ἀβασκάντων 19 μου ἀδελφῶν. ἅμα δὲ καὶ τὸ προσκύ-
1 This formula is undoubtedly Christian (1 Cor. iv. 10; 2 Cor. iv. 11; Phil. iii. 7, 8). 2 Probably a faint echo of Luke xvii. 4.
* Cf. Franz Steinleitner, Die Beicht im Zusammenhange mit der sakvalen Rechtspflege in dev Antike, Leipzig, 1913. 4 Cf. letter 2318¢. below.
5 Some Private Letters of the Roman Period from the London Collection, offprint from the Revue Egyptologique 1, fasc. 3-4 (1919), No. 2, p. 5 ff. For the photograph, which reduces the size of the original by a half, I am indebted to the comradeship in learning so often shown me by Bell. The letters, separated from each other when they reached the British Museum, and’ there brought together again, were obtained together with portions of the correspondence of Zeno (see p. 152 above), which emanates from the Fayiim; whether they were found there is not quite certain. According to Bell the place where they were written is possibly Alexandria.
[For notes 6 to 28 see pages 193, 194.
ae eee) Bigs scoot
ag = re
Fic. 35.—Letters from Sempronius, an Egyptian, to his mother Saturnila and his brother Maximus, second half of the 2nd cent. a.p. Papyrus from Alexandria (?). Now in the British Museum. Facsimile kindly obtained by H. I. Bell.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 193
5 νημα 11 ὑμῶν ποιοῦμε  ἡμερησίως παρὰ τῶ κυρί-
ὦ 13 Σεράπιδι. τοσαύτας ὑμεῖν 13 ἐπιστολὰς διεπεμ-
ἢ ὑδεμείαν 13 3 ᾿ 14 ,
άμην κοὐδεμείαν 18 μοι ἀντεγράψαται,14 τοσούτων
Ul
καταπλευσάντων. ᾿Ἐρωτηθείς,15 ἡ κυρία μον,16 ἀνόκνως ἐς: ἢ a n μοι γράφειν περὶ τῆς σωτηρίας 17 ὑμῶν iva κἀγὼ ἀμε-
IO ριμνότερα 18 διάγῳ. τοῦτό μοι γὰρ εὐκτῆον 7 ἐστὶν διαπαν- τός. ἀσπάζομαι Μάξιμον καὶ τὴν σύμβιον αὐτοῦ καὶ Σα- τουρνῖλον καὶ Τέμελλον καὶ Ἑλένην καὶ τοὺς αὐτῆς.139 μετάδος αὐτῇ ὅτι ἐκομεισάμην 13 Se tov é λὴν 13
ἢ μπρωνίου ἐπειστολὴν ἀπὸ Καπποδοκίας.20 ἀσπάζομαι Ἰούλιον καὶ τοὺς αὖ-
15 τοῦ κατ᾽ ὄνομα 31 καὶ Σκυθικὸν καὶ Θερμοῦθιν 33 καὶ τὰ media” αὐτῆς. ἀσπάζετε ὑμᾶς Τέμελλος.
ἔρρωσό μοι, ἡ κυρία pov,!® διαπαντός.
Continuation of notes to pages 192-195 :—
$ “ Mother and lady,” deferentially, like older English ‘‘ my lady mother ”” or modern German “ Frau Mutter.’ For “lady τ᾿ cf. 2 John-1 and 5 and p. 167 above; also the graffito of Amerimnus, p. 277 below.
7 ¢ for a. “8 Cf. p. 180, n. 4.
® On μετὰ καί (the καί pleonastic, as in Phil. iv. 3) cf. Neue Bibelstudien, p. 93; Bible Studies, pp. 64, 265 f.
10 ἀβάσκαντος is a frequent expression for averting evil (‘‘ apotropaeic ”’) in the papyri, equivalent to the wish, ‘‘ whom may no evil eye injure.” [It comes from βασκαίνω, “ to bewitch,” the word used in Gal. iii. 1. Cf. p. 280, n. 6 below. Tr.]
11 Cf. p. 187, n. 5 above.
12 Cf. p. 180, n. 6 above.
18 εἰ fore. : 14 a for ε.
18 The initial E is very large. Sempronius means ἐρωτηθεῖσα; he uses the participle in curiously abrupt fashion here and in 1. 21. Cf. below, letter No. 21, col. III, 1. 1.
1¢ Nominative for vocative, as often in the New Testament.
1” Cf. p. 180, n. 13 above.
18 (Comparative of the word used in 1 Cor. vii. 32, ‘‘ without carefulness ”” "A.V.), or “ free from cares’ (R.V.). TR.]
19. The family relationships appear to be as follows: the mother, Saturnila, is a widow; there are living with her (in the Fayim?) her sons Maximus (married), Saturnilus and Gemellus (considerably younger), and the married daughter Helena with her children; Helena’s husband, also called Sempronius (l. 13 £.), seems to be abroad, in Cappadocia, and is in correspondence (per- haps of a business kind) with his brother-in-law, the writer of our letter (who is in Alexandria ?).—The persons named later on, Julius and family, Scythicus and (his wife?) Thermuthis and her children, seem to be domestics. The Gemellus of 1. 16 has gone with Sempronius to Alexandria (?) as assistant. Might he be twin-brother of the Gemellus in 1, 12? Each must then have had some distinguishing name in addition.
20 More probably o than a.
1 Just as in 3 John 15, ἀσπάζου τοὺς φίλους κατ᾽ ὄνομα, ‘salute the friends by name " (R.YV.).
22 The woman’s name is either Thermuthis or Thermuthi(o]n.
[For notes 23-28 see next page.
104 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Σεμπρώνιος Μαξίμωι τῷ ἀδελφῶ .᾿ πλ[ζε]ῖστα χαίρειν. πρὸ τῶν ὅλων ἐρῶσθέ 7: 23 20 σε εὔχομαι.8 μετέλαβον ὅτι βαρέως δουλεύζου)ετε
τὴν κυρίαν ὃ ἡμῶν μητέραν.33 ἐρωτηθείς,"Ὁ ἀδελφὲ ta
13 τῶν ἀ-
κύταται,14 ἐν μηδενεὶ 13 αὐτὴν λύπει. εἰ δέ τεις δελφῶν ἀντιλέγει αὐτῆ, σὺ ὀφείλεις αὐτοὺς κολαφί- ζει[ν]. ἤδη γὰρ πατὴρ ὀφίλεις 35 καλεῖσθαι. ἐπείσταμε 13: 1 25 ὅτι χωρὶς τῶν γραμμάτων μου δυνατὸς εἶ αὐτῇ dpéce.2 28 ἀλλὰ μὴ βαρέως ἔχε μου τὰ γράμματα νουθε- «τοῦν[τ]ά σε. ὀφίλομεν 35 γὰρ σέβεσθε τὴν τεκοῦσαν ὡς θε[ὸν] 37 μάλειστα 13 τοιαύτην οὖσαν ἀγαθήν. ταῦτά σοι é- ypawa, ἀδελφέ, ἐ ἐπειστάμενος 13 38 τὴν γλυκασίαν τῶν
30 κυ[ρίων γονέων. καλῶς π[ο]ιήσις 25 γράψας μοι περὶ τῆς
σ[ωτ]ηρίας 17 ὑμ[ώ]ν. ἔρρωσό μοι, ἀδελφέ. On the verso the address : ἀπόδος Μαξίμωι x< ἀπὸ Σεμπρωνίου x< ἀδελφοῦ.
Sempronius to Saturnila his mother and lady ® many greetings. Before all things fare thee well, I pray,® together also ® with my brethren unbewitched.1° And withal I make my (5) intercession # for you daily to the lord 13 Serapis. So many letters have I sent unto you, and not one have ye written back again unto me, though so many have sailed down. Besought (art thou), my lady, to write unto me without delay of your health,!” that I also may live more free (10) from cares.18 For this is my prayer continually. I salute Maximus and his life’s partner and Satur- nilus and Gemellus and Helena and them (which are) of her (household).19 Impart unto her that I have received of Sem-
Continuation of notes to pages 192-195 :—
28 For ἐρρῶσθαί.
4 Vulgar form and use of the accusative.
35 for εἰ.
26 For the thought cf. Philemon 21, εἰδὼς ὅτι καὶ ὑπὲρ ἃ λέγω ποιήσεις, “ knowing that thou wilt do even beyond what I say” (R.V.).
27 Important for the understanding of the famous opening of the homily 2 Clem. i. 1: οὕτως δεῖ ἡμᾶς φρονεῖν περὶ ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ ὡς περὶ θεοῦ, ‘thus we ought to think of Jesus Christ as it were of (a) god” (cf. Pliny to Trajan, Epist. x. 97, carmenque Christo quasi deo dicere, ‘‘ and sing a hymn to Christ as it were toa god’’). The men of the ancient world were simple and did not understand ἌΚΩΝ lofty words, proper to a cult, in any strained dogmatic sense.
28 As it stands the participle ought to mean ‘‘ because I know.”’ Far more suitable to the context would be ‘‘ because thou [as a married man ?] knowesf.” The nominative of the participle might in vulgar usage that has thrown off the restraints of syntax refer to the dative ‘ thee.” Sempronius does not shine in his use of participles generally.
w
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE = 195
pronius a letter from Cappodocia.2® I salute Julius and them (which are of) his (household) (15) by name,”! and Scythicus and Thermuthis 2? and her children. Gemellus saluteth you.
Fare me well, my lady, continually.
Sempronius to Maximus his brother many greetings. Before all things fare thee well, (20) I pray. I heard that ye are dull of service to the lady ὃ our mother. Besought (art thou), sweetest brother: in nothing grieve her. But if one of the brethren gain- say her, thou oughtest to buffet them, For thou oughtest now to be called father. I know (25) that without writings from me thou art able to please her.*® But be not displeased with my writings admonishing thee. For we ought to worship her who bore us as it were a god,” especially when she is good. These things have I written unto thee, brother, knowing 38. the sweetness of the lords our parents. Thou shalt do well if thou writest unto me concerning your health. Fare me well, brother.
On the verso the address :
Deliver to Maximus >< from Sempronius ° his brother.
It is maddening! Here we are, far from home in the great city, slaving day after day, trying to overcome homesickness by faithful intercession for mother, brothers, and sister before the lord Serapis, even writing letter after letter home—but day after day passes, without any answer! Brother-in-law Sempronius is the only one who still seems to remember us; but if the letter from him finds its way from distant Cappadocia to (Alexandria ?), well, really, mother and Maximus might surely send a line! With boats arriving so often from home too! But no, not one single sign of life from them direct ! Instead of that, unpleasant gossip reaches the ears of the anxious letter-writer. People coming from his part of the country have looked him up at the docks and told him that everything is going topsy-turvy at home: since father’s death there has been no more obedience in the house; instead of looking after their mother, the youngest have been behaving rudely to the old lady and doing just as they liked. . . . Oh, it is maddening! Can’t Maximus put a stop to it? But he himself seems to have been behaving in none too exemplary fashion towards his mother. . . .
Sempronius is writing under the vivid impression of this
196 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
news and of his increased anxieties. One thing is clear to his delicate sensibility 3: he must not let his lady mother, who obviously is now having a specially hard time, observe that he knows anything of the scandal of those ill-behaved brothers ; that would only distress her still more. And so the blowing- up is put into the letter to Maximus; the old mother hears nothing but kindness and affection. She hears it literally; for she can probably neither read nor write.*_ Maximus reads the letter to her, and then surely she will at last dictate a few ‘lines for the homesick son so far away. She surely must notice how greatly he yearns for a message, how he remembers them all, in his prayers and out of them—mother, brothers, sister, his sister-in-law and the little ones, and the farm hands —every one of them without exception.
That Maximus himself is not entirely free from blame is shown by the opening of the refreshingly plain letter of reproof to him: ‘ Ye are dull of service to the lady our mother.” But Sempronius then discharges his main wrath on the. younger brothers, Saturnilus and Gemellus: they deserve a clouting, right and left, and the eldest brother, who really is entitled to stand in the father’s place, had better administer it. Maximus is bound to see it all; he does not really need a letter like this, for he is at bottom a faithful son. And so the great saying will have its effect on him: ‘‘ We ought to worship a mother as it were (a) god.’ Sempronius did not coin this saying himself; he knows it from his teachers. But he believes in it; and as he writes the words, Sempronius sees the old lady before him, in her helplessness and distress, but in all her goodness of heart too: oh, what a splendid mother we have got! how sweet it is still to have parents to love! These thoughts come in all tenderness from the same soul which, a moment ago, in deep indignation, had demanded such rough physical measures. . . .
The two letters of Sempronius are valuable evidences of a humanity which, transcending all the divisions of separate cults, was present in the ancient world, a fragment of real praeparatio evangelica. Hearts of such deep family sympathy, of such strong religiously tinged devotion to father and
1 This has already been pointed out with fine discrimination by Bell. 2 As also conjectured, I think rightly, by Bell.
Fic. 36.—Letter from Aurelius Archelaus, military tribune, lines I-24, 2nd cent. a.p
Now in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. By per: tion Fund.
beneficiarius, to Julius Domitius, - Papyrus from Oxyrhynchus. mission of the Egypt Explora-
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 197
mother, were no bad soil for the grains of wheat scattered by the apostolic sowers.
17 Letter from Aurelius Archelaus, beneficiarius, to Julius Domitius, military tribune, Oxyrhynchus, 2nd cent. a.D., p&pyrus, now in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, discovered and pub- lished by Grenfell and Hunt 1 (Figure 36).
This letter is of great interest in various respects: as a good example of an ancient letter of recommendation,? as an early Latin letter, as a specimen of vulgar Latin 8 of the date of the Muratorian Canon. Scholars of repute have even considered it to be a Christian letter—and if that were so its value, considering its age, would be unique.
I have retained the remarkable punctuation by means of stops. The clear division of the words should also be noticed.
I[uliio Domitio® tribuno To Julius Domitius,5 mili- mal(itum) leg(tonis) tary tribune of the legion, from
ab: Aurel(to) Archelao be- Aurelius Archelaus his bene- nef (tciario)
jiciarius, greeting. tam tibt et pristine commen- Already aforetime I have 5 daueram Theonem amicum recommended unto thee (5) meum et mod[o quloque peto Theon my friend, and now also domine® ut eum ant’ oculos | I pray, lord,® that thou mayest habeas’ tanquam: me:® est e- | have? him before thine eyes as nim: tales omo® ut ametur myself.8 For he is such a man
1 The Oxyrhynchus Papyri (I.) No. 32. The facsimile there given (Plate VIIL.) is reproduced here (Figure 36) by permission of the Egypt Exploration Fund. The last part of the letter, which was discovered later, is given by Grenfell and Hunt in the Oxyrhynchus Papyri, Part II. p. 318 f. It comprises lines 22-34.
2 Cf. p. 171 above.
3 Observe the marked use of parataxis, and cf. p. 131 ff. above.
4 The two little fragments to the right below (on a level with ll. 20, 21) read respectively Jst.[ and ]quza[.
5 The subordinate politely places the name of his superior officer first, οὗ, pp. 152, n. 3; 162,1.9. Alfred von Domaszewski (postcard, Heidelberg, 6 August, 1908) refers to the forms of an official report ; actus (1. 16) he takes to be “conduct of my office,”’ the writer's conscience being not quite easy on that score. In line 26 my correspondent would conjecture suc]cessorvis, supposing the soldier about to be relieved of his post.
5 Lord is a polite form of address.
7 For this phrase, which recurs in 1. 31 f., cf. πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν λαμβάνειν, 2 Macc. viii. 17, 3 Macc. iv. 4, and the Tebtunis Papyri, No. 28,, (c’vca 114 B.c.),
[For continuation of notes see next page.
suo salutem-
198 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
10 ate: reliquit: enim su[o]s [e]t | that he may be loved (10) by rem suam et actum etme | thee. For he left his own secutus est! " et per omnia ᾿ .
ee people, his goods and business,
se[c]urum fecit- et ideo peto | and followed me.* And through a te» ut habeat tntr[ojitum- | all things he hath kept me in
15 at te® et “π΄ tibi refere-| safety. And therefore I pray ne ie : actuly] oon of thee that he may have quitquit mle d)ixit- [{]1- entering in (15) unto thee.2 And {lult et factlum....... fee] he is able to declare unto thee amauy hlo]min[e]m [......... ] | all things concerning our busi-
5 . Ἵ
20 Mil... 56, ὃ der [ ..κἀ{κἀπι: 1 π655.} Whatsoever he hath ἢϊ.....} . dominfe.....0. j : : 8 m[......J.td esfé...... seal told me, so it was in very face Ake 17 habl eee 1 | deed.* I have loved the man Al ee 1 et [-.. Ven τράγο ] mn (21) lord... .. that
25 tor.t..[. + -] {φρ[56ππἨπττττν ]lis....have....and.... τς re fos) (ijiend oc. him as cessoris uft il]lum co[mmen- . mediator that 1 would
darem (?)} recommend (?) him. Be ye
1 Cf. Matt. xix. 27 = Mark x. 28 = Luke xviii. 28, ‘ Lo, we have left all, and have followed Thee.” Cf. also Matt. iv. 20, 22.
2 Cf. St. Paul, 1 Thess. i. 9, ὁποίαν εἴσοδον ἔσχομεν πρὸς ὑμᾶς, ‘ what manner of entering in we had unto you.” :
3 = de actu (or acto) nostro. Cf. ad nobis, Muratorian Canon, |. 47. For the whole sentence cf. St. Paul. Col. iv. 7, τὰ κατ᾽ ἐμὲ πάντα γνωρίσει ὑμῖν Τυχικός, “all my affairs shall Tychicus make known unto you.”
4 The conjectured restoration of the text is uncertain. Grenfell and Hunt: “ Whatever he tells you about me you may take as a fact.”
ὃ Hugo Koch, writing to me from Braunsberg, 25 November, 1908, con- jectured a relative clause with the subjunctive here. He quoted Ambrosius, De Obitu Theodosti, c. 34 (Migne, Patr. Lat.16, col. 1459), “ dilext virum, qui magis arguentem quam adulantem probaret.”
5 Here begins the second and more recently discovered fragment.
Continuation of notes to page 197 :— with Crénert, Wochenschrift fiir klassische Philologie, 20 (1903) col. 457; πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν τιθέναι, Epistle of Aristeas, 284, and Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 362 Ver. (215 A.D.); and actually πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν ἔχειν in an inscription at Talmi, Dittenberger, Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae, No. 210, (circa 247 A.D.). Another inscription of the reign of Hadrian, from Pergamum, Athenische Mitteilungen, 24 (1899) p. 199, should be compared. I note these passages, because people might easily scent a Hebraism here, 5 Cf. St. Paul, Philemon 17, προσλαβοῦ αὐτὸν ws ἐμέ, ‘‘ receive him as myself.” 3. = talis homo. With omo cf. odie, in the Muratorian Canon, 1. 11.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 199
estote felicissi[m: domine most happy, lord, many years, _mul-] * ; _ | with all thine, (30) in good ee Ol Se a ata health. Have this letter before
30 ben[e agentes] thine eyes,?, lord, and think hanc epistulam ant’ ocu- that I speak with thee? Fare-
los? habeto domine putalt)o | well. me tecum loqui® uale
On the verso the address : 4
35 IOVLIO DOMITIO TRI- (35) To Julius Domitius, mili- BVNO MILITVM LE- | tary tribune of the legion, from
G(IONIS) Aurelius Archelaus, benefict- ab- Aurelio: Archelao- b(ene- | arius. fictario)
The situation in this letter is quite clear, and needs no reconstruction. It is only necessary to say something about the theory, first advanced by N. Tamassia and G. Setti in collaboration,® and approved by P. Viereck,® that the letter was written by a Christian. In support of it we are referred to the various “ Biblical’ and especially ‘“‘ New Testament ”’ echoes it contains, the chief being a striking parallel to the words of St. Peter, ‘‘ Lo, we have left all, and have followed Thee.” In conscious or unconscious recollection of these Gospel words, we are told, Archelaus writes of Theon that he had left his own people, his possessions, and business, and had followed him—so that Archelaus at least must be regarded as a Christian.? There is certainly something alluring about this theory, but nevertheless I am not able to accept it. If Archelaus were a Christian it is extremely unlikely, I think, that he would have profaned St. Peter’s words by applying them to the relations of an ordinary human friendship. The
1 Grenfell and Hunt conjecture fo- instead of mul-.
? See p. 197, ἢ. 7.
8. This pretty observation should be compared with the ancient comparison of a letter to a conversation, quoted below, p. 228, n. 1.
4 The address is written on fragment I.
5 Due Papiri d’Oxirinco. An offprint from the Atti del R. Istit. Veneto di Scienze, etc., t. 59, Venezia, 1900. I know this paper only from Viereck’s review (see next note).
5 Berliner Philologische Wochenschrift, 21 (1901) col. 907 f. 7 Viereck, col. 907.
200 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
double concept of leaving and following is employed by St. Peter in the deepest sense of evangelical self-denial and refers to the disciples and the Master. But the expression “leave and follow” is quite likely to have been one of the stock phrases in ancient letters of recommendation; in the Gospel it acquires ethical status. The other “ Biblical ’’ and particularly “‘ Pauline’ echoes are explainable in the same way. Archelaus was not acquainted with the Pauline Epistles,? but Paul and Archelaus were acquainted with the complimentary phraseology employed in ancient letter- writing.
To the historian of manners this letter of Aurelius Archelaus is a speaking testimony to the noble, unreserved humanity that was possible in the Roman army of the second century, even in the relations between a subordinate and his superior.
18
Letter from Harpocras, an Egyptian, to Phthomonthes, 29 Decem- ber, 192 A.D., ostracon from Thebes, now in the author’s collection, deciphered by U. Wilcken * (Figure 37).
A delivery-order in letter-form, perfectly simple and un- assuming, but interesting in style and language.
“Aproxpas Φθομώ(ν)θη χαίρειν. Harpocras to Phthomonthes δὸς Ψενμφ()θη Wad καὶ Πλήνι greeting. Give to Psenmonthes, ᾿ the son of Paos,. and to Plenis, the son of Pauosis, of Phmau, ἀπὸ * Φμᾳῦ γεωργοῖς Λίμνης f4e | husbandmen of the lake, 5 εἰς πλήρωσιν f λε y(ivovra) f λε. (artabae) of wheat, to make 5 L Ay] THB(.) y. up the 35 (artabae) of wheat. #8, ποτὲδ δὸς τῷ nee They are 35 (artabae) of wheat. | καὶ my more’ οὖς τῇ SPA” | (5) In the year 33, Tybi3. And παιδίσκη Ἷ now at length give to my maid τὰς τοῦ fy E| the 32 artabae of wheat.
Παουώσιρ(ς)
Ὁ What a significance for the history of the canon would attach to quota- tions from St. Paul found in an unknown person’s letter in the second century | How pleased we should be to be able to believe the letter Christian !
2 Cf. now P. M. Meyer, Griechische Texte aus Agypten, Deissmann collection, ostracon No. 57 (p.176f.). Ihave taken account of Meyer's fresh decipherment. For details see his commentary. The text will also be found in Preisigke, Sammelbuch griechischer Urkunden aus Agypten, I, Strassburg, 1915, No. 4253.
* The same ἀπό that has been so often misunderstood in Heb. xiii. 24; cf. my little note in Hermes, 33 (1898) p. 344. As on the ostracon people at.
[For continuation of notes see next page.
Fic. 37.—Letter from Ἡδγροοσαβ, an Egyptian, to Phthomonthes, 29 December, 192 A.D. Ostracon from Thebes. Now in the Author’s collection.
Fic. 38.—Letter from Theon, an Egyptian boy, to his father Theon, 2nd or 3rd cent. a.p.
Papyrus from Oxyrhynchus. Now in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. Facsimile kindly obtained by Dr. Arthur S. Hunt.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 201
19 Letter from Theon, an Egyptian boy, to his father Theon, 2nd or 3rd cent. A.D., papyrus from Oxyrhynchus, now in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, discovered and published by Grenfell and Hunt } (Figure 38).
This letter, written in a schoolboy’s uncial hand, is of the
-highest importance for a variety of reasons: it is at once a . picture of ancient family life, a portrait of a naughty boy drawn by himself, and a specimen of the most uncultivated form of popular speech. Blass’s* remark, that the boy “ violates ’’ grammar, is about as true as if I were to calla sloe-hedge a violation of the espalier. At the outset Theon had no grammar to suffer humiliation and violence at a later stage of his career. He had merely the language of the streets and the playground, and that language the rogue speaks also in his letter. The spelling too is “ very bad,’ says Blass— as if the boy had been writing an examination exercise; but from this “‘ bad” (really on the whole phonetic) spelling the Greek scholar can learn more than from ten correct official documents. The style I recommend to the consideration of all who are specialists in detecting the stylistic features characteristic of the Semitic race.
Θέων Θέωνι τῶ πατρὶ χαίρειν.
a ρον 3 *, a2 ta r> καλῶς ἐποίησες.3 οὐκ darévynyés* με μετ᾽ ἐ- σοῦδϑ εἰς πόλιν. ἢ ὃ οὐ θέλις ἴ ἀπενέκκειν ὃ με- τ᾿ ἐσοῦ ὃ εἰς ᾿Αλεξανδρίαν, οὐ μὴ γράψω σε ἐ-.
1 The Oxyrhynchus Papyri (I.) No. 119, cf. II. p. 320. See also U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Géttingische gelehrte Anzeigen, 1898, p. 686, F. Blass, Hermes, 34 (1899) p. 312 ff.; Preisigke, p. 110 f. Grenfelland Hunt, it seems, did not adopt all Blass’s suggestions. I follow their readings. For the facsimile (Figure 38) I am indebted to the kindness of Dr. Arthur 5. Hunt. Further reprints of the text in Lietzmann,? p. 13f.; Milligan, p. 102 f.; Laudien, p. 4 f.; Helbing, p. 121 ff.; Schubart, p. 78.
2 Page 312. 3 = ἐποίησας. 4 = ἀπήνεγκες. 5 = σου, formed like ἐμοῦ, common, δ =e. 7 = θέλεις. 8 = ἀπενεγκεῖν.
Continuation of notes to page 200 :— Phmau are meant, so no doubt in the Epistle to the Hebrews of ἀπὸ τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας (‘they of Italy,” A.V., R.V. ) means people in Lealys (Cf. p. 173, text, 1.8. TR.] 4 Contraction for πυροῦ, ‘‘ wheat.” ve) ποτέ is used as in Rom. i. ro.
5 ἐμός unemphatic as, for example, in Rom. x. 1. “* female slave.”
-
202 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
5 πιστολήν, οὔτε λαλῶ σε, οὔτε viyevw! σε εἶτα, ἂν 3 δὲ ἔλθης εἰς ᾿Αλεξανδρίαν, οὐ μὴ λάβω χεῖραν 3 παρά [σἾου, οὔτε πάλι" χαίρω σε λυπόν.δ ἂμ μὴ ὃ θέλης ἀπενέκαι Ἶ με], ταῦτα γε[ίνετε.8 καὶ ἡ μήτηρ μου εἶπε ᾽Αρ- 10 χελάω, ὅτι ἀναστατοῖ με Gppov® αὐτόν. καλῶς δὲ ἐποίησες.10 δῶρά pide ἔπεμψες] 1} μεγάλα, ἀράκια. πεπλάνηκαν ἡμῶς 13 ἐκε[1], τῇ ἡμέρα ιβ ὅτι18 ἔπλευσες.14 λυπὸν πέμψον εἴ[ με, παρακαλῶ σε. ἂμ μὴ δ πέμψης, οὐ μὴ φά- 15 yo, οὐ μὴ πείνω.15 ταῦτα. ἐρῶσθέ15 σε εὔχ(ομαι). Τῦβι τη. On the verso the address : ἀπόδος Θέωνι [ἀ]πὸ Θεωνᾶτος vid.
Theon to Theon his father greeting. Thou hast done well.1? Thou hast not carried me with thee to the town. If thou wilt not carry me with thee to Alexandria, I will not write thee 18 a (5) letter, nor speak thee,2® nor wish thee 18 health. But if thou goest 19 to Alexandria, I will not take hand from thee, nor greet thee again henceforth.” If thou wilt not carry me, these things come to pass. My mother also said to Archelaus, (10) ‘‘ he driveth me mad*!; away with him.” # But thou hast done well.}? Thou hast sent me great 33 gifts—locust-beans.*4 They deceived 25
1 = ὑγιγένω (-: ὑγιγαίνω from ὑγιαίνω, Karl Dieterich, Untersuchungen, p. 91 f. and p. 187, n. 25 above).
3 = ἐάν. 3 = χεῖρα. 4 = πάλιν as in the oldest Christian papyrus letter extant (No. 21 below, Tlist.)
5 = λοιπόν. ὁ ἐὰν μή as in the letter of the Papas Caor (No. 24 below).
7 = ἀπενέγκαι. 8 = γίνεται. 9 = ἄρον.
10 = ἐποίησας. 11 = ἔπεμψας. 12 = ἡμᾶς.
13 = Gre? " 14 = ἔπλευσας. 15 = πίνω. 16 = ἐρρῶσθαί. 17 Tronical.
18 The word in the original has the form of the accusative. This is not an outrage on grammar, but a symptom that the dative was beginning to disappear in the popular language.
19 That is to say: alone, without taking the son.
20 λοιπόν, as used frequently in St. Paul’s letters.
31 The ‘ New Testament ”’ ἀναστατόω, cf. p. 84 f. above.
22 ἄρον is used exactly like this in John xix. 15.
23 Blass and Preisigke take ‘‘ great ’’ with the word which I have translated “locust-beans.”” Our interpretation makes the irony clearer.
24 Perhaps something like the husks which the Prodigal Son (Luke xv. 16) would fain have eaten.
25 πλανάω, as frequently in the New Testament.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 203
us! there on the 12th day, when thou didst sail. Finally,? send for me, I beseech thee. If thou sendest not, I will not eat (15) nor drink. Evenso.4 Fare thee well, I pray. Tybi 18.
On the verso the address : Deliver to Theon from Theonas 5 his son.
A nice handful, this boy! He has wrought his mother to such a pitch that she is almost beside herself and has but one ‘wish: ‘“Away with him!” And the father is no better treated. Little Theon is determined at all costs to share in the journey to Alexandria planned by Theon the elder. There have already been several scenes about it, and the father, who has no need of the urchin on his long journey, can think of no other way out of the difficulty but to start on the voyage to the capital, Alexandria, under the pretext of a little trip “to the town” (probably Oxyrhynchus).6 This was on 7 January. The weak father’s conscience pricks him for his treachery, and so he sends a little present to console the boy he has outwitted—some locust-beans for him to eat, which the father perhaps thought would be a treat for him so early in the year. But he was mistaken there. As day after day goes by and the father does not return from ‘‘ the town,” the victim sees through the plot. He knows now why he was not allowed to go with his father this time to “ the town ”’; he sees now why he received the fine present—fine present indeed, why the poor people eat those locust-beans 7! Burn- ing with rage, he sits down to write on 13 January. Having found out that his father was to stop somewhere en route,
1 Us = probably Theon and (his brother?) Archelaus.
2 See p. 202, n. 20.
3 This notice of a hunger-strike recalls the curse under which the Jewish zealots bound themselves, ‘' that they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul” (Acts. xxiii. 12, 21). Wettstein, Novum Testamentum Graecum, Il. p. 615, quotes similar formulae from Rabbinic sources.
4 After ταῦτα we must probably understand γίνεται (cf. 1.9). ΟἿ. the abrupt ταῦτα in inscriptions: Eduard Loch, Festschrift... Ludwig Friedlaender dargebracht von seinen Schiilern, Leipzig, 1895, p. 289 ff.; R. Heberdey and E. Kalinka, Denkschriften der Kais. Akad. ἃ. Wissensch. zu Wien, Phil.-hist. Classe, 45 (1897) 1 Abh. pp. 5 f., 53-
5 Theonas is the pet-form of the name Theon.
6 I surmise that Theon’s home was some little place on the Nile (cf. ἔπλευσες, 1, 13), south of Oxyrhynchus, which would then be “‘ the town ”’ referred to.
7 Cf. Blass, p. 314.
204 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
he composes this blackmailing letter we have before us. Impudent, ironical, with childish wilfulness he pours out his threats. He will stop doing everything that a well brought-up . Child should do to its parents—wishing them good-day, shak- ing hands, wishing them health, writing nice letters. Worst threat of all, he will starve to death of his own free will. That will bring daddy round, the device has never failed yet. And still with all his defiant naughtiness, -Theon can contrive a tolerable joke. His mother had cried in desperation to (his brother?) Archelaus, ‘‘ He drives me mad, away with him,” and Theon is quick-witted enough to turn this into an argument with his father for travelling to Alexandria after all! The same derisive artfulness is apparent in the address. On the outside of a letter bristling with impudence he has mischievously written as the name of the sender Theonas, the father’s pet name for his pampered child.
Did Theon the elder, to whom such a letter could be written, do-what the naughty boy wanted at last? The out- lines which the son has unconsciously drawn of his father’s portrait- certainly do not forbid our answering the question in the affirmative.
20
Letter from Pacysis, an Egyptian, to his son, about the 3rd cent. A.D., ostracon from Thebes, now in the author’s collection, deciphered by U. Wilcken ? (Figure 309).
Πακῦσις Πατσέβθιο(ς) τῶ vid Pacysis, the son of Patsebthis, μου x(aipey). to my son greeting. Contra-
μὴ ἀντιλογήσης. μετὰ στρατιώ. | του 8 dict not. Ye have dwelt there
[ὠι %]ejoar’ ἐκεῖ, μ[ηδ]ὲ rapade- | with a soldier. But take her [én airy]y,* ἕως ἔλθω πρὸς ἡμᾶς
Β. [προ aces ἂν |iwe ie ae ἔρρωσο. {5} tere a and Farewell.
not till I come to you.
1 Anyone who needs a restorative after the impudence of Theon had better read the letters (dull, it must be admitted) from model boys to their parents, as preserved, for instance, in The Oxyrhynchus Papyri, No. 1296 and in Bell, Some Private Letters, No. 2, p. 2 ff.
2 Wilcken examined the ostracon on two occasions, once in the autumn of 1904, and again at the beginning of 1907. Not all that was visible in 1904 can be read now. See now P. M. Meyer, Griechische Texte aus Agypten, Deissmann collection, ostracon No. 64 (p. 187), and Preisigke, Sammelbuch I, No. 4254.
[For notes 3-5 see next page.
Fic. 39.—Letter from Pacysis, an Egyptian, to his son, about the 3rd cent. a.p. Ostracon from Thebes. Now in the Author’s collection.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 205
In its wretchedly sorry state this greatly faded ostracon is a typical example of a poor man’s letter in ancient times. Theon, the father whose acquaintance we made in the last letter, was obviously better off, but would he, we wonder, ever have been able, like Pacysis, in dealing with his son to use such a wholesomely rough expression as “ Contradict not’?
21
Letter from an Egyptian Christian at Rome to his fellow-Christians in the Arsinoite nome, between 264 (265) and 282 (281) A.D., papyrus from Egypt (probably the Fayaim), formerly in the collection of Lord Amherst of Hackney at Didlington Hall, Norfolk, published by Grenfell and Hunt 1 (Figure 40).
This papyrus is at present perhaps the oldest ? known autograph letter in existence from the hand of a Christian and in spite of being badly mutilated it is of great value.
From external characteristics the fragment was dated
1 The Amherst Papyri, Part I, No. 3a, with a facsimile in Part II. Plate 25, which I here reproduce by the kind permission of the late Lord Amherst of Hackney. The reproduction (Figure 40) is about half the size of the original. The text is also in Wilcken, Chvrestomathie, Ὁ. 153f., No. 126. Another restoration of the text was attempted by E. Kalinka in ‘“‘ Aus der Werkstatt des Hoérsaals: Papyrusstudien und andere Beitrage,’’ a volume presented to the Innsbruck ‘‘ Philologenklub,’’ Innsbruck, 1914, p. 2 ff. I agree with Wilcken, p. 153, in thinking that a re-examination of the original is necessary.
2 The Bale papyrus No. 16, also a Christian letter, has been assigned by its editor Rabel (cf. above, p. 31, n. 1) to the beginning of the 3rd cent. a.p. Wilcken, however, would place it nearer the middle of the 3rd cent. (Archiv 6, p. 437). The letter (extremely meagre in contents) might therefore be older than our No. 21; but I think the question is not yet decided.
Continuation of notes to page 204 :—
3 The punctuation was doubtful to me at first. I thought of reading μὴ ἀντιλογήσης μετὰ στρατιώτου, ‘‘ dispute not with a soldier,’ when μετά would be used as it is frequently in the New Testament and elsewhere after πολεμέω. But I now feel sure that the sentences should be separated as above. ἀντιλογέω is used of obstinacy, like ἀντιλέγω in the letter of Sempronius (above, No. {15 and] 16,,).
4 I nowrestore the text thus, following a suggestion from Gustav Bréndsted (letter, Hellerup, 13 April, 1912). There seems to be a reference to a girl with whom the son was about to contract an irregular union. Only thus do the ye and you become clear. There is no need to mention hey by name, because father and son know precisely who is meant.
5 ἡμᾶς must certainly mean ὑμᾶς; this confusion, of which there are countless instances in MSS. of the New Testament, arose in consequence of both words being pronounced alike, imas.
206 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
between 250 and 285 A.D. by Grenfell and Hunt, who deci- phered and first published it, and their chronology has been brilliantly confirmed by an observation of Harnack’s.1 He found that the ‘‘ pope Maximus ”’ mentioned in the letter was Bishop Maximus of Alexandria, who was in office from 264 (265) to 282 (281) A.D.
By no means everything has yet been accomplished for the restoration of the text. Two other texts contained on the same precious fragment have from the first somewhat diverted attention from the letter itself. A few lines from the begin- ning of the Epistle to the Hebrews have been written above the second column of the letter in an almost contemporary hand,? while on the back Dr. J. Rendel Harris was the first to recognise a fragment of Genesis i. I-5 in Aquila’s translation preceded by the Septuagint parallel in a handwriting of the -age of Constantine.
The first attempt at a restoration of the missing parts of the letter was by C. Wessely.2 My own attempt, here given,‘ agrees in several places independently with his. I feel obliged to point out that parts of the attempted restoration of the text are extremely hypothetical. The same remark applies also to the attempt made by Kalinka.5 But com- bined effort is necessary for the solution of such tasks, and I should be the first to discard these conjectures in favour of better ones.
CoLtumn I
contains the remains of ro lines, not deciphered by Grenfell and Hunt. A re-examination of the original is- greatly to be desired, but merely from the facsimile I should not venture to say anything.
1 Sitzungsberichte der Kéniglich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, 1900, p. 987 ff. Harnack thinks there is much to be said for the theory that the papyrus contains two letters. Then, I think, we should have to assume that the fragment was a leaf of the writer’s letter copy-book (cf. below, p. 2354., the remarks on Rom. xvi.). But the more probable assumption is that we have only one letter here.
2 See the facsimile.
3 Patrologia Orientalis, Tome IV. Fascicule 2, p. 135 ff.
4 Cf. also a short notice in the Supplement to the Allgemeine Zeitung (Munich), 1900, No. 250.
5 Cf. p. 205, ἢ. 1 above. Skirmishing between Wessely and Kalinka in the Deutsche Literaturzeitung (1916) col. 1944 £. and (1917) col. 110 f.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 207
Cotumn 11 ΚΠ τω » Jyoyy σον ἧς ἀνν[ώνης] 1 we [ae sia ᾿δξο]διάσαι τὴν κριθὴν. ἢ
ἐκ Top [αὐτοῦ] λόγου [καὶ] μὴ τὸ abr[3]_ φροντ[(σωσι]ν οἷον καὶ elpyrw?.[. . Jo 5, ἐνθηκ[ῶν ὃ ἀπο]στελλομένων πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀ[πὸ] τῆς ᾿Αλεξανδρείας. καὶ προφάσε[ις] καὶ ἀναβολὰς καὶ ἀνα- δόσις ἃ ποιη[σάμενος οὐχ οἴομαι αὐτ[ὸ]ν ταῦτα [δίχα] αἰτίας οὗτος ὅ πεφρονι- IO κέναι. εἰ δὲ καὶ ἂν νῦν αὕτη ἡ περισ- σότης ἡ συμβεβηκυῖαν 7 μὴ ποιήσαι λόγον, is τὸ καλῶς ἔχειν τ[ελ]εῖν εὖ ἀνέχομαι. εἰ δὲ εἶ. .. . ] ἄρτοις ὃ πά- εν Ag? πεπράσιγ 1 ο [{. 7] εἰσ [. Jy διὰ μ[κρὸν γε- 15 νέσθαι πρὸς τὴν [. . Jef. . . Jv Νῖλον καὶ τὸν πατέρα ᾿Απολλῶνιν εἰς A..T.....@. ἐπέστειλάν τε παραχρ[ῆμ]α τὸ ἀργύριον ἐξοδιασ- θῆναι ὑμῖν. ὃ καὶ καταγάγειται 11 20 ἰς τὴν ᾿Αλεξάνδριαν ὠνησάμε- γον 12 ἀόνας 13 παρ᾽ ὑμῖν ἐν τῶ ᾿Αρσινο- [ε]ΐίτη. τοῦτο yap συνεθ[ἐμην Πρει- μειτείνω, ὥστε τὸ ἀργύριον αὐτ[ῶ] is τ[ὴν] ᾿Α[λε]ξάνδριαν ἐξωδιασθῆναι.14 25 [(ἔτους).}}| Παῦνι ἢ ἀπὸ ἹΡώμης.15 1 This conjecture is not certain, but U. Wilcken agrees with me in thinking it probable. The Latin annona often appears as a borrowed word in Greek
papyri. 2 = εἴρητο. * Corpus Glossariorum Lat. 5» 619: “ enteca est pecunia commertiis desti- nata ” (Kalinka, Pp. 5).
4 = ἀναδόσεις. 5 = οὕτως.
δ = πεφρονηκέναι. 7 = συμβεβηκυῖα.
® = ἄρτους ἢ ® = βπάλιν, as in Theon’s letter above, No. 19,.
10 = πεπράς, 2 1 -- 2 7) ‘ ? = mempd xa) ow? = καταγάγετε. ὠνησάμενοι ἢ
15. Grenfell and Hunt cite from Epicharmus ἀών as the name οἵ ἃ fish. They observe—very rightly—that this is not likely to be the word here. We may perhaps assume with Wessely that ὀθόνας was the word intended (cf. column III). Hermann Diels wrote to me (Berlin W., 22 July, 1908): “ὀθόνας is suggested by the sense, but there is not room enough for it. Is it possible that the word there was the synonymous dévas (vestimenta), which has hitherto defied explanation in Bacchylides 17 (16), 112?’ A. Debrunner (letter, Basel, 25 April, 1913) asks: ‘‘ Ought we to read d<v)dvas = ἀννώνας inl.1?” (The new Liddell and Scott, 1926, assumes ἀών here to mean “a kind of garment.” Tr.]
14 = ἐξοδιασθῆναι.
18 This and the corresponding line in column III are ce in another hand than the body of the letter. Cf. above, pp. 166, ἢ. 7; 1
208 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Cotumn III
Καλῶς οὖν ποιήσαντες, ἀδελφοί,] évycdpevo[t]! τὰ ὀθόνϊια. .. . .. . τι ves ἐξ ἡμ[ῶ]ν 5 roval....... . λαβέτωσ-] 3 αν σὺν αὐτοῖς ἐξορμ[ήσαντες πρὸς]
5 Μάξιμον τὸν πάπαΪν ὁ καὶ... ...... 718 τὸν ἀναγν[ὠσἼτην. καὶ [ἐν τῇ ᾿Αλεξανδρία] πωλήσαντες] τὰ ὀθόνια ἐκεῖνα ἐξο-] διάσητε τὸ ἀργύριον [Πρειμειτεί-] νω ἢ Μαξίμω τῶ πάπ[α ἀποχὴν ἀπο-]
IO AapPavorz[e]s παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ. αὐτὸς δὲ τὴν] ἐπιθήκ[ην, τὴν τιμὴν τοῦ ὑφ᾽ ὑμῶν] πῳλο[υμέ]νου ἄρ[του καὶ τῶν ὀθονί-} wv τὸ ἀργύριον, παρακᾳβταθέσθω παρα-
᾿ς δρὺς αὐτὸ Θεονᾶ,7 ἵνα σὺν [Θεῶ ὃ παρα-]
I5 γενόμενος is τὴν ᾿Αλεξ[άνδρειαν] εὗροϑ αὐτὸ is τὰ ἀναλώμα[τά μου. uy] οὖν ἀμελήσητε, ἀδελφοίί, διὰ ταχέ-] wv τοῦτο ποιῆσαι, ἵνα μὴ[ Πρειμει-} τεῖνος διὰ τὴν ἐμὴν προ[θεσμίαν ἐν]
20 τῆ ᾿Αλεξανδρεία διατρίψη [πλεῖν μέλλων] ἐπὶ τὴν Ῥώμην, ἀλλ᾽ ᾧς ἡμᾶς [ὠφέλησε πα-] ράτευξιν 19 πάπα καὶ τοῖς κατ᾽ α[ὐτὸν ἁγιω-]
1 After καλῶς ποιεῖν we have here as in Theon’s letter (No. 19 above) not the infinitive, but a paratactic participle; similar constructions in the Oxyrhyn- chus Papyri, No. 113¢¢, and 1165¢,14 (both letters of the 2nd cent. a:p.). The use is, however, much older, as shown by the letter (Hibeh Papyri, No 82}. ἢ. 238 B.c.) quoted above, p. 87, note 5.
2 = ὑμῶν. :
3 This conjecture is not free from doubt, as the writer generally divides words differently.
4 For the title πάπας, ‘‘ pope,” cf. Harnack’s observations on the letter, p. 989 ff., and see Caor’s letter, No. 24 below.
5 Wessely here conjectures the name Primitinus. But this, in the ortho- graphy of the writer, would be too long.
ὁ Grenfell and Hunt read zapaxo, but to judge from the facsimile παρακᾳ would also be possible.
7 = OcwrG.
8 For this conjecture cf. 1. 16 of the letter of Psenosiris, No. 22 below, ὅταν ἔλθη σὺν θεῷ. The formula σὺν θεῷ, ‘‘ with God,” occurs frequently elsewhere. The writer of this letter fulfils almost literally the injunction in the Epistle of St. James iv. 13 ff. not to say, ‘‘ To-day or to-morrow we will go into such a city . . . and trade, and get gain,’’ without adding, ‘‘ If the Lord will and we live.”
9. = εὕρω, cf. 1. 24 rdfo. The writer often confuses o and w.
10 παράτευξις is a new word, ‘‘ intercourse, personal relations,’’ perhaps also ‘intercession ’’ (cf. évrevgis, Bibelstudien, pp. 117f., 143 4.; Bible Studies, pp. 121, 146).
Tel a
“OUMO 93k] 91] ‘AoUHeE jo ysrayury ῬΙΟΊ 10 uorsstuead Aq avy (1gz) zgz pue (S9z) toz
UseMJeq aWOY 28 τ|9γ7τιλὶ ‘sniddeg
ue Worf 1929] = -TeUIsIIQ ydes30}nW 911} UT jUe}x—a 79H9T UPTSUYD 259Ρ[0 ey} sdeyrag—‘or “910
7
vy
᾿ΘΌΙΟΤΙ S}OUISIV 911 Ul SUeI}SLIYO-MOT[ay sty 07 ueiysiy) uendAsq
gerdar a
ati ett
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 209
τάτοις + προ[εστῶσι 3], τείσ[ω αὐτῶ χάριν] καὶ πάντα σ[ύμφω]να τάξο > ὑμῖν καὶ ’A-] 25 γαθοβούϊλω. ἐρρ]ῶσθαι ὑ[μᾶς εὔχομαι. Jarada.[
-CoLumn II
. of which corn... deliver the barley4... from the same account, and that they should not be careful of. that same which had also been said . . . (5) when the stores (of money] were sent to him ὃ from Alexandria. And though I made excuses and delays and puttings off, I think not that he ® thus desired these things? without cause. (10) And even if now this super- fluity® which hath happened should not make a reckoning [possible], for the sake of [my own] good feelings ® I will gladly endure ?® to pay. Butif ... they have again sold loaves, . in a little while (15) happen to . .. Nilus™ and [my?] father Apollonis #2 in A... And they have written that the money shall be delivered unto you immediately. Which also bring ye down (20) to Alexandria, having bought . . . among you in
1 For ἁγιώτατος cf. Jude 20. The superlative is common in both secular and ecclesiastical use.
3 For προεστώς, ‘‘ chief man, ruler’ in early ecclesiastical use cf. Joh. Caspar Suicerus, Thesauyus Ecclesiasticus ὃ IL., Trajecti ad Rhenum, 1746, col. 840; for the later Egyptian use see quotations in W. E. Crum, Coptic Ostvaca, p. 113 of the lithographed part.
8. = τάξω, cf. 1. 16 evpo. σύμφωνος is common in the papyri in such contexts. The phrase σύμφωνα διατάττω is quoted in the Thesaurus Graecae Linguae from Plato, Legg. 5. 746 E.
« Hence we may conclude that dealings in corn are in the background of this letter.
58.1.6. Primitinus, who was then also in Rome.
6 Primitinus.
7 Payment of the money in Alexandria instead of Rome.
® The letter was dated or signed in the beginning of June; this suggests that the harvest was unusually good, and business correspondingly heavy.
9 Cf. the last lines of column III. The writer wants to have his conscience clear towards Primitinus.
10 The word is no doubt used playfully. Wilcken proposes: ‘‘ yet I will gladly make the sacrifice for the sake of decency.”
11 If the reading “‘ Nilos ” is not certain, I should expect a female name, say  Nilis ” (cf. letter 14, above). The preceding word would then be [ἀδ]ςε[λφή]ν, sister.’ Kalinka adopts this conjecture and thinks Ni[vJov is possible as a woman's name.
12 Apollonis is short for Apollonius. Harnack assumes that ‘‘ Father ’’ was the title of the provincial bishop, and takes Apollonius to be the bishop of the particular church in the Arsinoite nome (p. 991; cf. also his Geschichte der altchristlichen Literatur, II. 2, p. 180). This does not seem to me very prob- able. I rather think that the writer is speaking of his real father (and
wee 2
210 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
the Arsinoite [nome]. For I have covenanted this with Primi- tinus, that the money shall be delivered unto him at Alexandria. (25) [Year]//, Pauni 8,! from Rome.
Cotumn III Ye did well,? therefore, brethren, having bought the linen cloth. ... let some of you take the... and set forth with
it 3 unto (5) Maximus the Papas and... the Lector. And having sold that linen cloth in Alexandria, deliver the money unto Primitinus or * Maximus the Papas, receiving a quittance (10) from him. But the gain, the price of the bread sold by you and the money for the linen cloth, let him commit and deliver it up unto Theonas,® in order that I, being come with God (15) to Alexandria,* may find it [ready] against my charges. Neglect not, therefore, brethren, to do this speedily, lest Primitinus, on account of the time appointed of me;? (20) should tarry in Alex- andria, being about to sail for Rome,’ but that, as he hath pro- fited us by dealings with the Papas and the most holy rulers who are before him, I may pay him thanks and determine all things in agreement for you and (25) Agathobulus.® Fare ye well, I pray... .... 2
1 = 2 June.
5. In the Greek text the verb is in the participle, through the carelessness of the writer in haste. Radermacher, Neutestamentliche Grammatik, p. 167, is no doubt right in asserting that the abrupt aorist participle is intended as a true past tense.—For the abrupt participle cf. the letters of Sempronius Nos. 15 and 16, lines 8 and 21, p. 193 f. above.
3 Or: ‘‘ Then let some of you take the .. with you (αὐτοῖς) and set forth unto...”
4 If Primitinus has not yet arrived at Alexandria.
* Theonas is therefore probably the financial agent of the Papas.” Harnack suggests very plausibly that he might be the Theonas who succeeded Maximus as Papas of Alexandria, 282 (281)-—300 A.D.
6 The writer therefore intends presently to go from Rome to Alexandria.
7 The date arranged with Primitinus for the payment of the money.
® Primitinus is therefore at present in Alexandria, but intends to return to Rome, where, according to column II, he had already been before.
» Tf our conjectural restoration of the text is correct in principle, Agathobulus would be eminently interested in the settlement of the money matters dis- cussed in the letter. Perhaps he as well as the writer was the confidential agent of the Arsinoite Christians at Rome.
10 The letters amada defy all attempts at certain restoration. Can it be that the Papas is once more named here? Kalinka, p. 5 f. is well worth noting. The conclusion of the letter containing the good wishes seems to have been set back farther from the margin (‘‘ indented,” a printer would say), which at a later date was quite usual, cf. my note in Vevréffentlichungen aus der Heidelberger Papyrus-Sammlung I. p, tor, and the letters of Psenosiris, Justinus, and Caor which follow below (Nos. 22-24).
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE ζεῖ
Let us now attempt to make out the situation in this venerable document. A hint will be sufficient reminder that, so far as the restored portion of the text is concerned, the attempt must remain questionable.
We might place as a motto at the head of this, possibly the earliest Christian letter of which the original has come down to us, the words which Tertullian! wrote two genera- tions earlier: ‘‘ We do business in ships... we follow husbandry, and bear our part in buying and selling.” The Christians of the generation before the great tempest of Diocletian persecution, whom we can here watch going about their work from our hidden post of observation, took their stand in the world, not alone praying for their daily bread, but also trading in it; ‘‘ they bought, they sold.”
Christians,? living somewhere in the fertile Arsinoite nome? of Egypt, have far away at Rome?‘ a confidential agent whose name we do not know, but whose letter and Greek we have before us in the original: rude clumsy characters in the main text of the letter, a somewhat more flowing hand in the concluding lines (perhaps in the agent’s autograph), the spelling uncultivated as of the people, the syntax that of the unlearned. This agent is supported perhaps by another, Agathobulus.5 They are entrusted with the dispatch of certain business connected with corn.®
A somewhat earlier letter written from Rome by one Irenaeus to his brother Apolinarius, who also resided in the Arsinoite nome,’ gives us a vivid picture of the kind of business. The man landed in Italy on the 6th of the month Epiph, finished unloading the corn-ship ® on the 18th Epiph, went on 25th Epiph to Rome, “‘ and the place received us as the god willed.” ® After that, it is true, Irenaeus had to wait
1 Apol. 42,“ Navigamus. . . et rusticamur et mercatus proinde miscemus.”’ 2 Column HI,, (I11,).
5 Thay 4 TI...
ΘΠ. 6 1
7 Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 27.
5. Cf. the corn-ship of Alexandria in which St. Paul sailed from Myra to Melita on his voyage to Rome, Acts xxvii. 6, 38. ,
9 καὶ παρεδέξατο ἡμᾶς ὁ τόπος ὡς ὁ θεὸς ἤθελε. This phrase has led people to regard the letter as a Christian one. The assumption is, I think, disposed of by Wilcken (Archiv fir Papyrusforschung, 1, p. 436; 4, P. 208 ἘΣ Chrestomathie, p. 524 ἴ., on No. 445); he interprets τόπος as the collegium naviculariorum at Rome, and 6 θεός as the god of this guild of seamen.
212 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
day after day for the conclusion of his business: “to this present day ! not one (of us) has finished this business of the corn.”
Such no doubt was the sort of work that the writer of our letter had to do, and he was dealing just now with a man named Primitinus,2 to whom he had to pay money.’ That cannot very well be money for corn, for it is to be assumed that the people of Egypt sold corn rather than bought it. Primitinus might be a shipowner, claiming the cost of freightage of the corn. In that case it is not sur- prising that he is now in Rome, now in Alexandria.* At the present time he is expected at Alexandria or is already there, but will return to Rome before long.* First, however, he will receive his money at Alexandria: so he had arranged at Rome with the writer of the letter.? The latter would have preferred some other mode of settlement, and had therefore at first tried all sorts of expedients,* but he came at last to the conviction that Primitinus had his good reasons,® and the writer of the lettet is now greatly concerned to keep his agreement with the man. For to him, the Alexandrian shipowner, the Christians of the Arsinoite nome are indebted for their close relations with the Papas of Alexandria, Maximus, the Lector , and other ecclesiastical dignitaries in the cosmopolis of Egypt.4° And although the good harvest has greatly stimulated the trade in corn, and the settlement of the bill might still perhaps be postponed to some quieter time," he presses for immediate payment: he wants his conscience to be easy,?” is anxious to keep true to his contract 18 and not appear ungrateful. .
If, however, the Arsinoites do send people 5 on the journey to Alexandria, to pay Primitinus, as good business men they will try to make a little money at the same time. They must take with them home-grown linen? that they have bought and sell it in the capital”; then, after Primitinus is paid,?® there will remain a tidy balance,!® which, with the
1 The letter is dated 9 Mesore (2 August).
2 Tye, TT Tye. rat. 3 ILon. * Is, 6. ITT, a, 5 ΤΙΣ, 90.
6 Προ. 7 ΤΩΡ. 8 Tle, 9 Tee.
10. TWlog WL ΤΠ 05. 12 TT,. 18 ΤΙ. TIT,,. 16 1Π1,.. 18 Τρ. 18 ΤΙρ) Πρ, τ Tile,
18 [lop 19 TIT).
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 213
profit from other ventures,! they must hand over to the Papas Maximus,? in reality to his steward Theonas,’ to hold as a deposit for the use of the writer of the letter when he presently returns, God willing, to Alexandria.* This is perhaps not the first time that they have laid up such “stores ’’5 at Alexandria.
To the ecclesiastical historian this is the most interesting part of the letter: Egyptian provincial Christians employ the highest ecclesiastic in the country as their confidential agent in money affairs! The link between the Christian corn-sellers in the Fayim and their agent in Rome is no casual exchanger, intent on his share of profit, but the Papas of Alexandria! This is certainly not a bad indication of the way in which the scattered churches held together socially, and of the willingness of the ecclesiastical leaders to help even in the worldly affairs of their co-religionists.
And so this oldest of Christian letters preserved in the original, although it contains, thank God, not a word of dogma, is still an extraordinarily valuable record of Chris- tianity in the days before Constantine—quite apart from its external value as an historical document, which Harnack has demonstrated to satisfaction. Certainly this papyrus was not unworthy of the impressive lines from the Greek Old and New Testaments which were afterwards written on it, and inscribed with which it has come down to our own day.
22
Letter from Psenosiris, a Christian presbyter, to Apollo, a Christian presbyter at Cysis in the Great Oasis, beginning of the 4th cent. A.D., papyrus from the Great Oasis, now in the British Museum, published by Grenfell and Hunt ὁ (Figure 41).”
This “ original document from the Diocletian persecution ”’ was made the subject of a special investigation by me in
1 Cf. in Ij the hints, now unfortunately very obscure, of the sale of bread.
2 Toe. 3 ΤΠ, 4 Wha 5 Ts¢,
® Greek Papyri, Series II., Oxford, 1897, No. 73., Further reprints of the text in Preuschen, Analecta I? (1909), p. 93 £.; Lietzmann,? p. 15 f.; Milligan, p. 117 ff.; Wilcken, Chvestomathie, p. 154. (No. 127); Helbing, p. 134 ff.; Schubart, p. 104.
7 This reproduction is almost of the exact size of the original.
214 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
1g02.1_ The copious literature to which the precious fragment has given rise since then has been already noted,” and I will only add here that I have been confirmed in my theory of the letter by the agreement of almost all the subsequent writers.? I here reprint the text with a few improvements, which do not affect my explanation of the letter, and with the corresponding alterations in the translation, and refer for the rest to my own little book and the other literature.*
Ψενοσίρι πρεσβ[υτέϊρω ᾿Απόλ- λωνι πρεσβυτέρω ἀγαπητῶ ἀδελφῶ
To (sic) Psénosiris presbyter, to Apollo presbyter, his beloved brother, greeting in the Lord.§
ἐν K(upi)w χαίρειν. Ν “ μὰ , 3 , πρὸ τῶν ὅλων πολλά σε ἀσπά-
Before all things I salute thee much (5) and all the breth- ren with thee in God. I would have thee know, brother, that the grave-diggers have brought here to Toéto Politica, who (10) hath been sent into the Oasis by the government. And I have delivered her unto the good and faithful οἵ - these grave-diggers in keeping, till
5 Comat καὶ τοὺς παρὰ σοὶ πάντας "ἀδελφοὺς ἐν Θ(ε)ῶ.
σε θέλω, ἀδελφέ, ὅτι οἱ νεκρο-
, YVvooKelv
τάφοι ἐνηνόχασιν ἐνθάδε εἰς Τοετὼ τὴν Πολιτικὴν τὴν Io πεμφθεῖσαν εἰς "Oacw ὑπὸ τῆς « ἡγεμονίας. καὶ [τ]αύτην πα- ραδέδωκα τοῖς καλοῖς καὶ πι- στοῖς ἐξ αὐτῶν τῶν νεκροτά-
> , ” >A "» φων εἰς τήρησιν, ἔστ᾽ ἂν ἔλ-
1 Ein Oviginal-Dokument ans der Diocletianischen Christenverfolgune, Tiibingen und Leipzig, 1902 (translated under the title The Epistle of Psenosiris, London, 1902; Cheap Edition, 1907). 2 Page 46, n. 3.
3 Grenfell and Hunt have meanwhile published a new example of the word that they print with a small letter instead of a capital, πολιτική, ‘“‘ harlot ”’ (The Oxyrhynchus Papyri [VI.], No. 903,;, 4th cent. a.D.), But this does not affect the possibility of my reading, Πολιτική, a propername. The numer- ous examples I gave of the use of this proper name can also, be increased; Crénert, for instance, in January 1904 referred me to a Greek inscription of the 2nd or 3rd cent. A.D. from Rome (Bull. della comm. arch. comm. di Roma, 1903, 279), Πολειτικῆ συμβίῳ. Cf. also A. Merk, Zeitschrift fir katholische Theologie 35 (1911) p. 414 ff.
4 On 4 October, 1906, I examined the papyrus in the British Museum, and convinced myself that Grenfell and Hunt were right in reading εξ αὐτῶν in 1. 13, and Ψενοσιρι in]. 1, and that 1. 9 reads not es το cow but (as Wilcken had pointed out, Archiv fir Papyrusforschung 3, p. 175) εἰς roerw OF εἰς τοεγω. The conjecture that this might be the name of a place (Chrestomathie, p. 155; and the earlier editions of the present work) is now, I think, assured. We must read εἰς Τοετώ. A place named Toéto is mentioned several times in the London Papyri IV. 1460 and 1461; fugitives escape sometimes to Toéto, sometimes from Toéto, and there is nothing to show that the place was not in the Great Oasis. Toéto was a κώμη or a pagarchy (Wilcken, letter to me, 16 May, 1911; and Chrestomathie, p. vi.). Dies diem docet.
3 Cf. Wilcken, Chrestomathie, p. 155.
ο Nn
beginning of the 4th
Papyrus, he British Museum.
is).
a Christian presbyter, to Apollo, a
asis Now in t
(Great O Diocletian persecution)
(
Fic. 41.—Letter from Psenosiris,
Christian presbyter at Cysis
cent. A.D.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 215
I5 θη ὃ vids αὐτῆς Νεῖλος. καὶ (15) her son Nilus come. And ὅταν ἔλθη σὺν Wed, μαρτυρή- when he come, with God, he
σι σοι περὶ ὧν αὐτὴν πεποι- | shall witness to thee concerning ἤκασιν. §[y]Aw[o]ov [δέ] μοι what things they have done
κ[αὶ σὺ] περὶ ὧν θέλεις ἐνταῦ- unto her. But do thou also 20 Oa ἡδέως ποιοῦντι. declare unto me _ concerning ἐρρῶσθαί σε εὔχομαι what things thou wouldest
ἐν K(upé)w Θ(ε)ῶ. have done, and (20) gladly
will I do them. Fare thee well, I pray, in the Lord God.
On the verso the address : ᾿Απόλλωνι Χ παρὰ Vevocipio[s] | To Apollo X from Psenosiris πρεσβυτέρω XK πρεσβυτέρου ἐν | presbyter Χ presbyter in the Κ(υρῆω Lord.
23
Letter from Justinus, an Egyptian Christian, to Papnuthius, a Christian, middle of the 4th cent. a.D., papyrus from Egypt, now in the University Library, Heidelberg, published by Deissmann 1 (Figure 42).?
I give here only the text and translation of the letter, which is typical of the popular religion of Egypt in the age of Athanasius and Pachomius, and for the rest refer to my edition, which gives a detailed commentary.
[TS κυρίω pov καὶ ἀγαπητῶ] To my lord and _ beloved [ἀδελφῶ Παπνουθίω χρηστο-] brother Papnuthius, the Christ- [pépp° ᾿Ιουστῖνος xatpew ] bearer °—Justinus, greeting.
pe oe She ae ee re ] ... (5), which it behoved
5 ἣν ἔδει γρα ihe “iets gad [me] to write to thy goodness, σὴν χρ[ηστότ]ηταν, κύριε μου
ἀγαπιτέ. πιστεύομεν γὰρ my beloved lord. For we τὴν πόλιτία[ν σου ἐνν οὐρανῶ. believe thy citizenship in ἐγῖθεν θεοροῦμέν σε τὸν heaven. Thence we consider
1 Veréffentlichungen aus der * Heidelberger Papyrus-Sammlung, I. (Die Septuaginta-Papyri und andere altchristliche Texte), Heidelberg, 1905, No. 6 (pp. 94-104). Further reprints in Milligan, p. 125 ff.; Schubart, p. 106 f.
2 This reproduction reduces the size of the original by one-third. On the left is the text of the letter, on the right a part of the verso with the address.
3 [Following H. I. Bell, Jews and Christians in Egypt, London, 1924, pp. ior f., 108 f., Deissmann no longer reads Χρηστοφόρου, ‘‘ the son of Chresto- phorus,’ but χρηστοφόρῳ, the word being still in the 4th cent. as in the time of the Ignatian Epistles (Ign., Eph. 9, 2) a technical term, “ Christ-bearer,’’ applied e.g. to those endowed with special gifts of prayer. See Deissmann’s Paulus’, p. 108, n. 3; Eng. trans. *p. 136, 0.6. Tr.]
216
10 δεσπότην καὶ κενὸν (π)ά[τ]ρω[να]. ἵνα οὖν μὴ πολλὰ γράφω καὶ φλυραρήσω, ἐν γὰρ [πο]λλῇ λαλιᾶ οὐκ ἐκφεύξοντ[αι]
(τ)ὴ(ν) ἁμαρτίη, παρακαλῶ [ο]ὖν,
15 δέσποτα, ἵνα μνημον ε]ύης μοι εἰς τὰς ἁγίας σου εὐχάς, ἵἴ- να δυνηθῶμεν μέρος τὸν (ἀμ-)
) εἷς γάρ εἶμει τὸν duaptovAdy.? παρακα-
20 λῶ καταξίωσον δέξεσθαι τὸ μικρὸν ἐλέου διὰ τοῦ ἀδελ-
a ᾽ν αρτιων καθαρίσεως.
φοῦ ἡμῶν Μαγαρίου. πολλὰ προσαγωρεϊ(ω) πάντες τοὺς ἀ- δελφοὺς ἡμῶν ἐν Κῶ. ἐρρω- 25 μένον σε ἡ θί-
a πρόνοια φυλάξα[ι]
ἐπὶ μέγιστον χρό-
νον ἐν ko Χω,
κύριε ἀγαπητί ἐ].
LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
thee the (10) master and new patron. Lest therefore I should write much and prate—for in much speaking they shall not escape sin1—I beseech thee, therefore, (15) master, that thou rememberest me in thy holy prayers, that we may be able [to obtain] a part in the purifying from sins. For I am one of the’sinners.? (20) Cotint [me] worthy, I beseech, and accept this little oil through our brother Magarius. I greet much all our brethren in the Lord. (25) The divine Provi- dence keep thee in health for a very great time in the Lord Christ, beloved lord.
On the verso the address : 30 [τῶ κυρίω] pov καὶ ἀγαπητῶ ἀδελφῶ Tlarvovfiw χρηστοφόρ[ῳ] 3
2 id παρ | Ἰουστίνου.
(30) To my lord and beloved brother Papnuthius, the Christ-
bearer, from Justinus.
24
Letter from Caor, Papas of Hermupolis, to Flavius Abinnaeus, ~ an officer at Dionysias in the Fayiim, c. 346 A.D., papyrus from Egypt, now in the British Museum, published by
Kenyon 4 (Figure 43).
This little letter is one of the finest among the papyri. The situation resembles that in St. Paul’s letter to Philemon, and the letter from the Papas to the officer can also be com-
1 Justinus is here quoting the Septuagint (Prov. x. 19) in a form of consider-
able textual interest.
2 This confession of sin can hardly be so genuinely felt as the peccavi of the prodigal son Antonis Longus (letter No. 14, above).
3 See p. 215, n. 3.
4 Greek Papyri in the British Museum, Catalogue with Texts, Vol. II., London, 1898, p. 299 f., No. 417. The fascimile (Plate 103) is here reproduced -
by kind permission of the British Museum authorities (Fig. 43).
Further
reprints in Milligan, p. 123 ff.; Wilcken, Chrestomathie Ὁ. 1561. (No. 129);
and Schubart, p. 109 f.
Fic. 42.—Letter (with Address) from Justinus, an Egyptian Christian, to Papnuthius, a Christian. Papyrus, middle of the 4th cent. a.p. Now in the University Library, Heidelberg.
Fic. 43.—Letter from Caor, Papas of Hermupolis, to Flavius Abinnaeus, an officer at Dionysias in the Fayim. Papyrus, civca 346 A.D. Now in the British Museum. By permission of the Museum authorities.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 217
pared in contents with that beautiful little letter of the Apostle’s, though the Papas is not fit to hold a candle to St. Paul.
T@ δεσπότη μον Kat dyeryte To my master and beloved ἀδελφῶ ᾿Α βιννέω πραι 1 , brother Abinneus the Praepo- pe Ἑρμουπόλεως situs—Caor, Papas of Hermu- ἀσπάζωμαι" πὰ πεδίαδ gov polis, greeting. I salute thy πολλά. children much. I would have
5. γινόσκιν ὃ σε θέλω, κύριε, thee know, lord, concerning π[ερὶ] Παύλω τοῦ στρατιότη ἴ Paul the soldier, concerning περὶ τῆς φυγῆς, συνχωρῆσε ὃ his flight: pardon him this
3 - a ΄ ν 9 αὐτοῦ τοῦτω τὸ ἅβαξ, : : ἐχειδὴ doyoXG ddbte 29 pile] once, seeing that I am without
10 ctv! αὐτεημερέ.12 καὶ rddew,!% | leisure to come unto thee at ἂμ μὴ 14 παύσεται,15 ἔρχεται this present. And, if he slacken
1 Abbreviation for πραιποσίτω. The title πραιπόσιτος κάστρων is the Latin praefectus castrovum.
21 at first suspected an abbreviation KaoTp = κάστρων. But Kenyon informed me (by postcard, London, W.C., 8 June, 1907) that the letters were certainly not xaorp. Both Wilcken (letter, Leipzig, 5 May, 1907), Schubart and Carl Schmidt (postcard, Berlin, 29 June, 1907) read from the facsimile xaop. The two latter conjecture that -op is the Egyptian god’s name Hor (as is commonly assumed, though not with certainty, to be the case in the name of Origen).
3 easy ae = χαίρειν. = ἀσπάζομαι.
5 = παιδία. 5 = γινώσκειν.
7 = Παύλου τοῦ στρατιώτου. 8 = συνχωρῆσαι.
® = αὐτῷ τοῦτο τὸ ἅπαξ. This is ἃ still older example of the substantival use of ἅπαξ which occurs in the inscription of King Silco (Dittenberger, Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae, No. 201; cf. p. 137, n. 3 above), which R. Lepsius took to be a Copticism. See Dittenberger’s notes, 7 and 10. Wilcken considers it to be popular Greek. In the Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung 6, p. 379 Wilcken quotes an example from the 2nd cent. a.D. (ἄλλα ἅπαξ). Cf. further in the early Byzantine Doctrina Jacobi nuper baptizati 45,17 ἄλλο ἅπαξ (P. Maas, Byzantinische Zeitschrift 20, p. 577). A. von Premerstein, Philo- logus, Supplementband 16, Heft 2, Leipzig, 1923, notes τοῦτο τὸ ἅπαξ in a papyrus of the reign of Claudius. [Early examples are furnished by the LXX: Judges xvi. 28, ἔτι τὸ ἅπαξ ; 2 Sam. xvii. 7, τὸ ἅπαξ τοῦτο. TR.]
10 = ἐλθεῖν.
-- σέ. This σέν is not a clerical error, but a paler use. 13. = αὐθημερόν, OF αὐτημερόν ? = πάλιν.
1 This ἄμ μή = ἐὰν μή occurs twice in the bad boy Theon’s letter to his father Theon (2nd or 3rd cent. a.pD.), Oxyrhynchus Papyri, No. 119,14; cf. above, letter No. 19. '
16 This is Wilcken’s reading from the facsimile. Kenyon read at first qevderat = ξεύδεται. According to the corrigenda in Vol. III. of the Greek Papyri in the British Museum Grenfell and Hunt also read παύσεται.
218 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST "
els τὰς χεῖράς σοῦ ἄλλω ἀβαξ.1 not, he will come again into
ἐρρῶσθαί σε εὖχο- thy hands? another time. Fare
μαι πολλοῖς χρό- 9
15 vins,? κύριε μον thee well, I pray, many years, ἀδελφέ. my lord brother.
The letter forms part of the correspondence of Flavius Abinnaeus, a Christian officer, who about the middle of the fourth century A.D. was praefectus castrorum of the camp of auxiliary cavalry at Dionysias in the Arsinoite nome. Important alike in respect to the history of civilisation, of. language, and of the Christian religion, this correspondence consists of some sixty original papyrus letters, some long, some short, some at London and some at Geneva, and still, in spite of excellent provisional publications by Kenyon 4 and Nicole,> awaiting a collective edition.6 The earliest dated letter in this priceless collection was written in the year 343, the most recent in 351 A.D.
Among the numerous unknown persons who have come to life again as correspondents of Abinnaeus in this collection one of the most remarkable is the writer of the present letter, Caor, Papas of Hermupolis. Like Kenyon? I at first took him to be a bishop, understanding the word Papas in the same way as in the Christian letter from Rome.? But I was unable to answer the difficult question, which Hermu- polis could then be meant? Lines 9 and 10 would suit neither Hermupolis Magna nor Hermupolis Parva, the only sees of this name; such an expression as we have there could only be used by somebody who lived not far from the residence of the addressee. I talked the matter over with my friend Wilcken, and he reminded me that several other letters in
1 = ἄλλο ἅπαξ, cf. n. 9, p. 217.
2 I.e, he will not desert again while executing an order, but will return to ou. ᾿ 3 = χρόνος, ‘ year,” is late Greek. 4 Greek Papyri in the British Museum, Vol. 11. pp. 267-307; and 307 ff. 5 Les Papyrus de Genéve, Nos. 45-65. 6 Wilcken’s valuable notes should not be forgotten, Archiv fir Papyrus- forschung, I, p. 162; 3, p. 397. 7 Page 299. ® Letter No. 21 above. For πάπας as the title of a bishop (abbreviated τ) cf. Giessen Papyrus No. 55, Thebaid, 6th cent. a.p., and the remarks of the editor, P. M. Meyer, who gives further material in the Berliner philologische | Wochenschrift, 1913, col. 875.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 219
the correspondence of Abinnaeus were written from a village called Hermupolis, in the south-west of the Fayim, which is mentioned in the papyri from the Ptolemaic age down to the seventh century A.p.!_ It then seemed to me that the obvious thing was to identify the Hermupolis of our papyrus with this village, and to regard the Papas not as a bishop but as a simple priest. The word Papas was applied in early times to village priests,? so there is no difficulty in so under- standing it here. This degradation of the writer of the letter in no way detracts from the value of the letter. Of the bishops of the fourth century we already knew more than enough; in Caor, who calls himself ‘‘ pope,” but is no pope, we rejoice to meet a representative of village Chris- tianity, and we range him beside Psenosiris, presbyter in the Oasis a generation earlier.
1 Details in Grenfell, Hunt, and Goodspeed, The Tebtunis Papyri, Part II., London, 1907, p. 376.
2 In the Theologische Literaturzeitung, 27 (1902) col. 360, Harnack notes the earliest passage known to him: in the Martyrium Theodoti a Galatian village-priest is called Papas. This passage is no doubt older than our papyrus. (H. D[elehaye], in the Analecta Bollandiana, 27, p. 443, considers that the Martyrium is not so old. But see Ramsay, Luke the Physician, London, 1908, p. 374.) Cf. further the Thesaurus Graecae Linguae, s.v. Πάπας. The differentiation, there shown to be as old as Eustathius of Thessalonica (Opus- cula, p. 38, 1. 58, about 1200 a.D.), by accenting the distinguished bishop πάπας and the insignificant presbyter παπᾶς is probably mere learned trifling. The history of the meaning of the word Papas is highly interesting. The question is, whether the grand word (for bishop or even archbishop or pope) degenerated, so that it could be applied to every presbyter, or whether an originally vulgar word was gradually ennobled. Looking merely at the comparative frequency of the word in its two meanings, one would be inclined to suppose that degenera- tion had occurred. But the facts of the case were probably the other way round: the word πάπας, a native of Asia Minor, where it was used as an epithet for Attis and Zeus (A. Dieterich, Eine Mithvasliturgie erldutert, Leipzig, 1903, p. 147), was probably first adopted from the popular Christianity of Asia Minor, and rose only gradually to its narrower and more distinguished meaning. Cf. U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Griechisches Lesebuch, 11. 2 (Erlauterungen),? Berlin, 1902, p. 260; A. Margaret Ramsay in Sir W. M. Ramsay’s Studies in the History and Art of the Eastern Provinces, p. 27; and Ramsay, Luke, p. 373 f. If we now possess more examples of the grand meaning than of the other, that is because documents of popular Christianity have not been preserved in such numbers as those of the higher class (cf. the conclusion of this chapter, p. 249). There is therefore philological justifica- tion for the old saying that the pettiest priestling conceals a popeling. [The German proverb says, “ Es ist kein Pfafflein so klein, Es steckt ein Papstlein drein ’—‘‘ No priestling so mean But hides a popeling, I ween.” Tr.] On πάπας as a secular title cf. Crum, Catalogue of the Coptic Manuscripts in the Collection of the John Rylands Library, Manchester, Manchester, 1909, p. 145.
220 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Whether the ‘‘ Pope” of Hermupolis was master of the Greek language seems to me to be a doubtful question. The good man was certainly not learned; indeed, his syntax is so rudimentary and his orthography so autocratic that many a rude soldier’s letter shows to advantage beside this of the Papas. Perhaps the man’s mother-tongue and language for ordinary occasions was Coptic; Greek he had learnt in a very vulgar form, and, good or bad, he made the best use he could of it. But I cannot help feeling that this violence to grammar, which would be unendurable in a book, is really not so bad in a letter, especially in this letter : it merely serves to strengthen the tone of unaffected sincerity.
What is the letter all about? Paul, one of the soldiers of the garrison under Abinnaeus, has been entrusted with some commission to execute,! and has failed to return to his commanding officer. After more or less vagabondage the deserter tires of the business and would like to go back. But how is he to set about it? how escape the punishment that is certainly in store for him? Then at Hermupolis he makes a village-priest his confidant and intercessor, promis- ing by all that is sacred that he will behave better in future. The Papas is in some doubt about the case; perhaps he knows the ecclesiastical ordinances dating from the concordat. between church and state, by which deserters are to be visited with ecclesiastical penalties, and he is not sure whether the man’s good resolutions may be trusted. But the pastor triumphs over the man of. ecclesiastical discipline, and he good-naturedly gives the deserter this note to take with him. If his Greek is not unexceptionable, his command of the epistolary formulae of an age of growing formalism is at least as good as that of the-polite and unctuous’ Justinus.? Without further argument he throws into the scale for Paul his personal friendship with Abinnaeus and his children, and then at once ventures to ask for a pardon. ‘‘ This once ” is delightful, and the pastor, foreseeing the weakness of the flesh, must have smiled as he wrote “ if he slacken not.”” The
' This seems a fair inference from lines 11 and 12.
3 Note the formal resemblances between the letters of Caor and Justinus (No. 23 above), and compare the stereotyped nature of the formulae in the correspondence of Abinnaeus as a whole.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 221
officer, who knows the fellow, is intended to smile too, in spite of his wrath, and it may be that Paul will after all go scot free.
This little genre painting gains in interest when we re- member that the treatment of deserters was a problem that occupied the early church and even led to a conciliar decree. In the year 314 the Council of Arles determined “that those who throw down their arms in time of peace shall be excommunicate.” 1 Caor the Papas of Hermupolis, however, solved the problem in his own way—and, I think, not badly.
25 Letter from Samuel, Jacob, and Aaron, three Egyptian candidates for the diaconate, to-their bishop, Abraham of Hermonthis(?), c. 600 A.D., Coptic ostracon from Egypt, now in the possession of the Egypt Exploration Fund, published by Crum ? (Figure 44).
This and the following Coptic ostracon, of the period pre- ceding the tremendous upheaval that Islam brought upon Egypt, may close our selection of letters. The Bishop Abraham to whom the first ostracon is addressed, and who probably caused the second to be written, Crum? conjectures with good reasons to be identical with the Bishop of Hermon- this who is known from his will, now extant on papyrus * in the British Museum, to have been living as an anchorite on the Holy Mount of the Memnonia (= Jéme) near Thebes, most probably towards the end of the 6th cent. a.pD. I owe the translation of these instructive texts to the kindness of my friend Carl Schmidt, of Berlin.*
1 Canon III: De his qui arma proiciunt in pace placuit abstineri eos a communione; cf. Harnack, Militia Christi, Die christliche Religion. und der Soldatenstand in den ersten drei Jahrhunderten, Tiibingen, 1905, p. 87 ff.
2 Coptic Ostvaca from the Collections. of the Egypt Exploration Fund, the Caivo Museum and others, No. 29 (p. 8 of the lithographed part, and p. 9 of the letterpress). The facsimile of the back of the ostracon (Fig. 44) is repro- duced here from Plate I. with the kind consent of the Egypt Exploration Fund.
3 Coptic Ostvaca, Ὁ. xiii f.
4 Greek Papyri in the British Museum (Vol. 1, No. 77 (p. 231 ff).
5 Coptic Ostraca, p. xiii f.
* [As far as possible the wording of Crum’s (incomplete) translation has been used here. TR.)
222 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
REcTO
(P)! I, Samuel, and Jacob and Aaron, we write to our holy father Apa Abraham, the bishop.? Seeing ® we have requested * thy paternity that thou wouldest ordain > us deacons,® we are ready ? to observe the commands 8 and canons® and to obey those above us and be obedient to the superiors and to watch our beds on the days of communion 11 and to . . . the Gospel 12 according to 13 John and learn it by heart 14
VERSO
by the end of Pentecost. If we do not learn it by heart and cease to practise it,!® there is no hand on us. And we will not trade nor take usury nor will we go abroad without asking (leave). I, Hémai, and Apa Jacob, son of Job, we are guarantors for Samuel. I, Simeon and Atre, we are guarantors for Jacob. I, Patermute the priest,!® and Moses and Lassa, we are guarantors for Aaron. I, Patermute, this least!” of priests,!8 have been requested 19 and have written this tablet 2° and am witness.
One wonders what the episcopal archives of the holy father Apa Abraham can have looked like, destined to contain such potsherd petitions as this.24_ Probably they were as primitive as the potsherd itself, as primitive as the intel- lectual equipment of the three prospective ecclesiastics, Samuel, Jacob, and Aaron, who have displayed the extent of their learning, ability, and ambition on this ostracon We ought rather to say, they got the least of all presbyters, Patermute, to display it for them, for—there is no con- cealing it—they themselves could perhaps. only read, and not write at all.
The three worthies are about to be ordained deacons;
1 Coptic letters generally begin with the monogram of Christ.
* ἐπίσκοπος. 3 ἐπειδή. [Crum compares 1 Cor. i. 22 (R.V.). TR.) 4 παρακαλεῖν. 5 χειροτονεῖν. ὁ διάκονος. 7 ἕτοιμος. 8 ἐντολαί. 5. κανόνες. 10 ὑποτάσσεσθαι. 11 συνάγειν. 15. εὐαγγέλιον. [Crum gives ‘‘ master(?)’’ in the place of Schmidt’s blank. ΤΑΊ : 13 κατά. 4 ἀποστηθίζειν. On this word see p. 223, ἢ. 11.
16 μελετᾶν. (Crum has: “ἀπά if we do not so but keep it by us (9) and recite it.” ΤᾺ] 16 πρεσβ(ύτερος). 17 ἐλάχιστος.
18. πρε(σβύτερος). 19 αἰτεῖν. 20 πλάξ (of white limestone).
2! Crum (p. 9 1.) has published a number of similar petitions from candidates.
Fic. 44.—Letter from Samuel, Jacob, and Aaron, candidates for the diaconate, to Bishop Abraham of Hermonthis (9). Coptic ostracon, ciyca 600 A.D. (verso). Now in the possession of the Egypt Exploration Fund, by whose permission it is reproduced.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 223
but before the “hand” of the bishop “is on them” they must fulfil the requirements of the sacred ordinances.! They must be prepared, firstly to keep the commandments 3 and rules,? secondly to obey their superiors, thirdly “ to watch their beds ’ 4 on communion days, fourthly to abjure commerce and take no usury, and fifthly to fulfil the duty of residence. All this, however, I expect, troubled them less than a special condition which the bishop had imposed upon them. Apa Abraham had set other candidates to learn the Gospel according to Matthew,® or according to Mark,® or a gospel,” or a whole gospel® by heart, or to write. out the Gospel according to John®; Bishop Aphu of Oxyrhynchus once required of a candidate for deacon’s orders five-and- twenty Psalms, two Epistles of St. Paul, and a portion of a gospel to be learnt by heart 15; and the task assigned to our three friends was to learn by heart the Gospel according to John by the end of Whitsuntide- and practise reciting 1{.31 Failing this, they could not be ordained. This stipulation presupposes some sort of examination by the bishop before ordination. The sureties produced by the candidates—
1 Cf. Crum’s excellent citations (p. 9) from Egyptian ecclesiastical law, which I have made use of in what follows.
2 Of God and the bishop; this is clear from the allied ostraca.
3 Of the Church.
4 Crum thinks this refers to sexual continence of the married clergy (post- card to the author, Aldeburgh, 13 September, 1907). Still it should be possible, I think, to explain the expression with reference to watching through the nights before communion.
5 Ostracon No. 31, Crum, p. 9.
5 Ostracon No. Ad. 7, Crum, p. Io.
_7 Ostracon No. 34, Crum, p. Io.
8 Ostracon No. 39, Crum, p. 11.
® Ostracon No. 37, Crum, p. 10. This probably throws some light on the origin of the gospel texts on ostraca already discussed (p. 57 ff.). We may suppose that they were written by prospective ecclesiastics at the bishop’s orders. Our general judgment of the texts is not affected by this supposition ; these potsherd-clerics are certainly not to be counted with the cultured class, they belong to the non-literary common people.
10 Evidence in Crum, p. 9, where still more examples are given.
11 The future historian of this custom of learning by heart must not neglect the similar phenomena in Judaism and Islam. Early Christian material is collected by E. Preuschen, Byzantinische Zeitschrift, 15 (1906) p. 644; and especially by Reitzenstein, Historia Monachorum, Pp. 162 ff., and 61 f., where the verb ἀποστηθίζειν, occurring on our ostracon, is shown to be a technical expression,
224 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
three by one candidate, and two each by the others—are again in accordance with the ecclesiastical regulations.?
A singular revelation of sorry circumstances this potsherd letter must be to those who imagine that three hundred years after the triumph of Christianity all the young clergy of Egypt would be theologians gifted with the knowledge of an Origen. But there can be no talk of a decline of learning in the case: the average education of the clergy probably never had been greater in this remote. country district. And Bishop. Abraham of Hermonthis, with his sympathy for the life of an anchorite, was not likely to be the man to raise the standard of learning among his people. The numerous documents from his hand, or from his chancery, written on the material used by the very poorest, and published by Crum, show him to have been a practical man, and particularly a man of discipline.
26 Letter probably from Bishop Abraham of Hermonthis (Ὁ) in Egypt to the clergy of his diocese, c. 600 A.D., Coptic ostracon from Egypt, now in the possession of the Egypt Exploration Fund, published by Crum ? (Figure 45).
There may be some doubt concerning the persons to whom this episcopal letter was sent. It deals with the ex- communication of a certain Psate, who was guilty of some misconduct towards the poor. The letter might therefore have been addressed to Psate’s own church, but it is equally possible that copies of the letter of excommunication were sent to all the churches in the diocese.?
The question, What was Psate guilty of ? depends on the interpretation of μαυλίζω, a word borrowed from the Greek, which keeps on recurring in the letter. It is not immediately obvious* what its meaning is here. The lexicographer
1 Cf. Crum, p. 9.
2 Coptic Ostraca, No. 71 (p. 16 f. of the lithographed text, and p. 13 of the letterpress). The facsimile of the back of the ostracon (Plate I.) is here repro- duced by kind permission of the Egypt Exploration Fund (Fig. 45).
3 Cf. the similar practice of the West at this period, F. Kober, Dey Kirchen- bann nach den Grundsdtzen des canonischen Rechts, Tibingen, 1857, p. 177.
4 E. A. Sophocles’ lexicon fails us completely : neither of its two quotations can be found. The information in the Thesaurus is better. Gleye, Padagog-
ischer Anzeiger fiir Russland, 1912, No. 3 (offprint, p. 3), refers to Ducange, appendix, for the meaning ‘‘ to enervate”’ (effeminare).
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 225
Hesychius says it means ‘‘ to act as pander ’’? and in this sense it occurs according to Johannes Baptista Cotelerius in the Nomocanon edited by him.? It is, however, a question whether it has not a wider meaning there, something like “to bring into misery.’”’3 In an old Greek penitentiary 4 the word occurs in a question of the father confessor, prob- ably in the meaning “ to seduce.”” I know no other instances of the use of the word. In the case of this ostracon the meanings ‘‘ act as pander’”’ and “‘ seduce’ seemed to Crum and Carl Schmidt not to suit particularly well; I therefore conjectured a wider meaning “‘ oppress,”’ ‘‘ bring into misery,” and in the former editions of this work I allowed it to stand in Carl Schmidt’s translation. I now think, however, that the meaning “ to play the pander,” ‘‘ to procure,”’ or ‘‘ to seduce ” should be adopted.®
᾽
REcTO
Since ® I have been informed that Psate seduceth’? the poor and they have told me saying,® “‘ He seduceth? us and maketh us poor and wretched”; he that seduceth? his neighbour is altogether reprobate ® and he is like unto Judas (5) who rose 1° from supper #4 with his Lord and betrayed 12 Him, as 13 it is
1 μαυλίζων' μαστροπεύων. Cf. also the Index graeco-latinus (Ρ. 577 μαυλιστής) and anglosaxonicus-latinus (p. 706 scyhend maulistis) in the Corpus Glossari- orum Latinorum, vol. VII., fasc. II., Lipsiae, 1903. According to M. Lambertz, Glotta 6, p. 5 f. μαυλιστήριον (‘‘ brothel ’’?) is a Lydian word. [Scyhend is the present participle of a rare Old English verb *scyccean (the infinitive is conjectural), ‘‘ to seduce,’’ a derivative of scucca, ‘‘ demon, devil.”” The modern English equivalent of scucca is shuck, the name of a dog-fiend or spectre hound in Norfolk and Cambridgeshire, and the adjective shy is related. Modern German cognates are scheuchen, “ to scare,” and Scheusal, ‘‘ thing of horror.” See the New English Dictionary and the English Dialect Dictionary. Tr.)
2 Ecclesiae Graecae Monumenia, Tomus I., Luteciae Parisiorum, 1677, p. 158 A, cf. p. 734 C: eight years of penance are imposed on the μαυλίζων.
3 The μαυλίζων is in company with the men who plough false furrows, give short measure and short weight, and sow their neighbours’ fields (?).
4 Edited by Jo. Morinus in his Commentarius Historicus de Disciplina in Adminisivatione Sacramenti Poenitentiae, p. 466 of the Venice edition of 1702 which I use, ἐμαύλισάς τινα; ‘‘ hast thou seduced anyone to unchastity? ”
5 Crum says “‘ill-use.”’ (TR.) 5. ἐπειδή. 7 μαυλίζειν.
8. Carl Schmidt suspects a clerical error here.
9 Crum translates ‘‘ is excluded from the feast.”
10 Carl Schmidt prefers ‘‘ who sat.” 11 δεῖπνον. 13 παραδιδόναι. 18. κατά.
226 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
written, “ He that eateth my bread hath lifted up his heel against - me.” 1 He that seduceth ? his neighbour is altogether reprobate and he is like-unto the man to whom Jesus said, “‘ It were better for him (10) if he had not been born,’’? that is Judas. He that seduceth 2 his neighbour is altogether reprobate and he is like unto them that spat in His face 4 and smote Him on the head.§ He that seduceth ? his neighbour is altogether reprobate and he is like unto Gehazi, unto whom (15) the leprosy of Naaman did cleave, and unto his seed.6 The man that seduceth 2 his neighbour is altogether reprobate and he is like unto Cain, who slew his brother. (20) The man that seduceth 3
VERSO
his neighbour is altogether reprobate and he is like unto Zimri, who slew his master.? He that seduceth 2 his neighbour is alto- gether reprobate and he is like unto Jeroboam, who (oppressed ?) (5) Israel, sinning (9). He that seduceth? his neighbour is altogether reprobate, and he is like unto them that accused Daniel the prophet.® He that seduceth 3 his neighbour is alto- _gether reprobate and he is like unto them that accused Susanna.!® But 11 he that seduceth 3 his neighbour is altogether (10) reprobate and he is like unto the men that cried, ‘‘ His blood be on us and on our children.” 12 The man that seduceth 3 his neighbour is alto- gether reprobate and he is like unto the soldiers 13 that said, “‘ Say ye, His disciples 4 came (15) by night and stole Him away, while we slept.” 15
This episcopal letter, which we may regard as a kind of letter of excommunication, has nothing particularly original about it. No doubt practically all of it is well-worn material, and even the monotony of the formulae of excommunication
1 Psalm xl. [xli.] 10 as quoted in John xiii. 18. 2 μαυλίζειν.
3 Matt. xxvi. 24 = Mark xiv. 21.
4 Matt. xxvi. 67 || Mark xiv. 65.
5 Ibid. ‘‘ On the head ”’ is inexact.
8 σπέρμα. The allusion is to 2 Kings v. 27.
7 2 Kings ix. 31, Ζαμβρεὶ 6 φονευτὴς τοῦ κυρίου αὐτοῦ, “ Zimri who slew his master.”
8 1 Kings xii. 30.
9 προφήτης. Dan. vi. 13, 24.
10 Susanna 28 ff. 1l δέ:
12 Matt. xxvii. 25.
18 This is a slight error of the bishop’s; the words were spoken fo the soldiers, not by them.
M μαθηταί. 18 Matt. xxviii. 13.
Fic. 45.—Letter probably from Bishop Abraham of Hermonthis ( ?) to the clergy of his diocese. Coptic ostracon, civca 600 A.D. (verso). Now in the possession of the Egypt Exploration Fund, by whose permission it is reproduced.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 227
is borrowed.t But this record of episcopal discipline was: most certainly intelligible to common folk and effective with them, and in the severity against Psate, who had wronged “the poor,” we see the survival of a sentiment thoroughly characteristic of the primitive Christians.
4. In the foregoing pages we have brought together six- and-twenty letters of ancient date. Had we merely printed the text of the letters, and nothing more, a casual reader might have supposed as he turned the pages that he had before him fragments of ancient literature. Witkowski’s magni- ficent collection of letters of the Ptolemaic age, which has found its way into Teubner’s “ Bibliotheca Scriptorum Graecorum et Romanorum,” is no doubt placed by many purchasers without further thought on the same shelf as the other Scriptoves. A glance, however, at the facsimiles of the original letters will banish at once in almost every case the thought of literature: no page of an ancient book ever looked like that letter of Antonis Longus to his mother Nilus, or like the ostracon addressed by the three candidates to Bishop Abraham. And whoever goes on to make himself acquainted with the contents of the texts will see still more clearly that he has before him not products of literary art but documents of life, and that Mnesiergus and Zoilus, Hilarion, Apion, and Sempronius are not Scriptores, nor is
1 For the passage about Judas and for the form in general cf. the Nomo- canon above cited in Cotelerius, I. 155 C, δευτέρα ἁμαρτία ἐστὶν ὅστις. . . μισεῖ καὶ καταλαλεῖ τὸν πλησίον αὐτοῦ. ὅμοιος γάρ ἐστιν τοῦ παραδώσαντος τὸν κύριον. διὸ καὶ per’ αὐτοῦ ἔχωσιν μέρος, “the second sin is, whosoever . . . hateth and slandereth his neighbour; for he is like unto him that betrayed the Lord. Therefore shall they also have their portion together with him.” Judas is frequently the type of the reprobate with whom no communion ‘is possible : [ἔχοι τ]ὴν μερίδα τοῦ Εἰουδᾶ τοῦ [προδότου] τοῦ δεσπότου ἡμῶν ᾿Πησοῦ Χριστ]οῦ, ‘may he have the portion of Judas, the betrayer of our Lord Jesus Christ,”’ is the imprecation in the epitaph of a Christian deaconess at Delphi (not later than 6th cent. A.D.) on whomsoever shall open the tomb, Bulletin de Corre- spondance Hellénique, 23 (1899) Ρ. 274, and the same curse is found in many other epitaphs (Victor Schultze, Die Katakomben, Leipzig, 1882, p. 15 ff.; Miinz, Anatheme und Verwinschungen auf christlichen Monumenten, Annalen des Vereins fiir Nassauische Altertumskunde und Geschichtsforschung, 14 [1887], p. 169 ff.), also in the official anathema of the Council of Toledo, 633 A.D., and other councils (Kober, Der Kivchenbann, pp. 41, 37). Of course the
ecclesiastical formulae have been influenced by Jewish precedent: cf. the leprosy of Gehazi in our ostracon and in a Jewish formulary cited by Kober,
pot
228 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
even Psenosiris, although that little letter of his, snatched from the dust of the Great Oasis, already figures in two histories of literature. Though we have printed them in a book, these ancient texts have nothing to do with books and things bookish. They are non-literary—most of them popular as well as non-literary—admirably adapted to familiarise us with the essential characters of popular and non-literary writing, and with the character of the non- literary letter in particular.
What is a letter? A letter is something non-literary, a means of communication between persons who are separated from each other. Confidential and personal in its nature, it is intended only for the person or persons to whom it is addressed, and not at all for the public or any kind of publicity. A letter is non-literary, just as much as a lease or a will. There is no essential difference between a letter and an oral dialogue; it might be described as an anticipation of the modern conversation by telephone, and it has been not unfairly called a conversation halved.1 It concerns nobody but the person who wrote it and the person who is to open it, From all other persons it is meant to be a secret. Its con- tents may be as various as life itself, and hence it is that letters preserved from ancient times form a delightful collec- tion of the liveliest instantaneous photographs of ancient life. The form of the letters also varies greatly; but in the course of centuries a number of formal peculiarities were developed, and we not infrequently find the same forms becoming stereotyped into formulae in civilisations apparently quite independent of one another. But neither contents, form, nor formulae can be decisive in determining the characteristic nature of aletter. Whether the letter is written on lead or on earthenware, on papyrus or parchment, on wax or on palm-leaf, on pink notepaper or on an inter-
’ The expression occurs in antiquity. Demetrius, De elocutione (Epistolo- gvaphi Graect, rec. Hercher, p. 13) traces back to Artemon, the editor of Aristotle’s letters, the saying that ‘‘a letter is the half of a conversation.” See further in Bibelstudien, Ὁ. 190; Bible Studies, p. 3 ff. Aurelius Archelaus, the beneficiarius whose letter we have cited above (No. 17), also knows this comparison of a letter with a conversation: ‘ hanc epistulam ant’ oculos habeto, domine, puta[t]o me tecum loqui.”’ This beautiful simile was there- fore quite a popular one,
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 229
national postcard, is as immaterial as whether it is clothed in the conventional formulae of the period. Whether it is well expressed or badly, long or short, written by a soldier or a bishop, that does not alter the peculiar characteristic which makes it a letter.1 Nor are the special contents any more decisive: the cool business letter of Harpocras, the impudent boyish scrawl of Theon, and the sanctimonious begging-letter of Justinus are distinguished from the coarse- ness of Hilarion and the despair of Antonis Longus only by the tone and the spirit in which they are written.
If the non-literary character of the letter, especially the ancient letter, has not always been clearly grasped, the explanation and excuse lie in the fact that even in antiquity the form of the non-literary letter was occasionally employed for literary purposes. At the time of the rise of Christianity the literary letter, the epistle as we have already called it,? had long been a favourite genre with writers among the Greeks, Romans, and Jews.
What is an epistle? An epistle is an artistic literary form, a species of literature, just like the dialogue, the oration, or the drama. It has nothing in common with the letter except its form; apart from that one might venture the paradox that the epistle is the opposite of a real letter. The contents of an epistle are intended for publicity—they aim at interesting “the public.”’ If the letter is a secret, the epistle is cried in the market; everyone may read it, and is expected to read it: the more readers it obtains, the better its purpose will be fulfilled. The main feature of the letter, viz. the address and the detail peculiar to the letter, becomes in the epistle
1 Cf. Bibelstudien, p. 190; Bible Studies, Ὁ. 4.
2 Cf. p. 149, n. 4 above. So also Adolf Wagner writes in Die Hilfe, 2 (1896) p. 2, to Friedrich Naumann, the editor of that newspaper: ‘' But, my dear sir, what was meant to be a mere letter has grown into a long epistle—a regular essay, though written in haste.” Even in the early centuries of the church people were sensible of the distinction between a letter and an epistle. A. von Harnack (postcard, Grunewald, 19 April, 1921) replying to one of my “ Evangelische Wochenbriefe ’’ (‘‘ Protestant Weekly Letters ''—which he justly terms epistles) refers me to Eusebius, Eccl. Hist. VII. xxvi. 2, where, speaking of the writings of Dionysius of Alexandria, it is said that there are extant by him ἐπιστολαὶ καὶ δὴ πολυεπεῖς λόγοι ἐν ἐπιστολῆς χαρακτῆρι ypagevres, “letters and copious treatises written in the manner of letters.” Among the latter Eusebius cites books which can really only be classed with letters
inasmuch as they contain dedications.
230 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
mere external ornament, intended to keep up the illusion of “epistolary ” form. Most letters are, partly at least, un- intelligible unless we know the addressees and the situation of the sender: Most epistles are intelligible even without our knowing the supposed addressee and the author. To attempt to fathom the soul of a letter-writer is always ven- turesome; to understand what an epistolographer has written is apprentice-work by comparison. The epistle differs from a letter as the dialogue from a conversation, as the historical drama does from history, as the carefully turned funeral oration does from the halting words of consolation spoken by a father to his motherless child—as art differs from ‘nature. The letter is a piece of life, the epistle is a product of literary art.
Of course there are things intermediate between letter and epistle. There are so-called letters in which the writer ceases to be naive, perhaps because he thinks himself a celebrity and casts a side-glance at the public between every word, coquettishly courting the publicity to which his lines’ may some day attain. “Letters” such as these, epistolary letters (the counterpart of letter-like epistles), more than half intended for publication, are bad letters; with their frigidity, affectation, and vain insincerity 1 they show us what a real letter should not be.
5. A large number of examples of both groups, letters and epistles, have come down to us from antiquity.
For a letter to become public and reach posterity is, strictly speaking, abnormal. The letter is essentially ephemeral, transitory as the hand that wrote it or the eyes for which it was destined.2. But thanks to loving devotion, or learning, or
1 Letters such as these no doubt inspired Grillparzer’s paradox (recorded by August Sauer in the Deutsche Literaturzeitung, 27, 1906, col. 1315) : “ every letter 15 4 116. [Franz Grillparzer, the great Austrian dramatist, 1791-1 872,.— The English reader may like to see the same thought expressed in character- istic style by Dr. Johnson. Criticising the letters of Pope, he says in the Lives of the Poets: ‘‘ There is, indeed, no transaction which offers stronger temptations to fallacy and sophistication than epistolary intercourse.” TR.]
2 Adolf Schmitthenner says (Die Christliche Welt, 15, 1901, col. 731): “ Printed letters are really a self-contradiction. A letter implies pen and ink, the one person who writes it, the other to whom it is written, and nothing more. It is a substitute for intercourse by word of mouth. Such intercourse ends
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 231
accident, or spite, we possess and may read letters that were not addressed to us. At an early date it became the custom after the death of eminent men to collect their manuscript remains. The first case of the publication of such a collec- tion of real letters among the Greeks is considered to be that of Aristotle’s, soon after his death in 322 B.c. Whether fragments of this genuine collection are preserved among the “Letters of Aristotle’ 1 that have come down to us, is a matter of question. The traditionary letters of Isocrates 3 (ft 338 B.c.) are probably to some extent genuine, and the letters of Plato have been recently, in part at least, pronounced genuine by eminent scholars. Authentic letters of Epicurus (+ 270 B.c.) have also come down to us, among them a frag- ment of a delightfully natural little letter to a child,? com- parable with Luther’s celebrated letter to his son Hinsichen.4 We may mention further one example among the Latins.® Cicero ([ 43 B.C.) wrote an enormous number of letters, four collections of which have come down to us. Still more valuable to us in many respects than these letters of great. men are the numerous letters of unknown persons which the new discoveries have brought to light, and of which we have already given a selection in this book. They possess the
with the spoken word and leaves no trace, save in our inward being. Should it not be the same also with that which takes its place? Ought we not from time to time to burn all our correspondence ?—We do not.” [Schmitthenner was a Heidelberg pastor and story-writer of distinction, 1854-1907. TR.]
1 Edited by R. Hercher in the Epistolographi Graect, pp. 172-174.
2 In Hercher, pp. 319-336.
3 In Hermann Usener, Epicurea, Leipzig, 1887, p. 154; Bibelstudien, p. 219 f., Bible Studies, p. 28, and U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Griechisches Lesebuch, I. 2,8 Ὁ. 396, and II. 2%, p. 260. It is not certain whether the child was Epicurus’ own.
4 [See Letters of Martin Luther selected and translated by Margaret A. Currie, London, 1908, p. 221. TR.] :
5 Hermann Peter, Der Brief in der rémischen Litteratur : Litterargeschicht- liche Untersuchungen und Zusammenfassungen (Abhandlungen der philo- logisch-historischen Classe der K6nigl. Sachsischen Gesellschaft der Wissen- schaften, Bd. XX. No. III.), Leipzig, 1901, supplies a great deal of material, but suffers from lack of a distinction between letter and epistle, isolates “ Roman ” literature too rigidly, describes the suppression of individuality as a characteristic feature of classical antiquity, and judges the men.of the period far too much according to the accidental remains of classical literature. Cf. my review in the Theologische Literaturzeitung, 27 (1902) cols. 41 ff.—I have not seen Loman’s Nalatenschap, 1., Groningen, 1899, pp. 14-42; cf.G. A. van den Bergh van Eysinga, Protestanische Monatshefte, 11 (1907) p. 260.
232 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
inestimable advantage that they have come down to us in the autograph original, and that their writers had not the slightest thought of future publication, so that they constitute a completely unprejudiced testimony on the part of the forgotten writers. They not only yield valuable evidence regarding the nature and form of the ancient letter,’ they are also instructive to those who study the nature and form of Biblical and early Christian letters.? _
It is not surprising that we possess so many specimens of ancient epistles. As an artistic literary form the epistle has no intention of being transitory. Being published from the first in a considerable number of copies it cannot so easily perish as a letter, of which there is only one or at most two copies made. It is moreover a very easily manageable form of literature. It knows no rigid laws of style; it is only necessary to employ the few epistolary flourishes and then affix an address. Hence it comes that every man of letters, even the least well-fitted, was able to write epistles, and the epistle became one of the most widely- used genres. Right down to the present day it has remained a favourite in all literatures. Of ancient epistolographers there are, for instance, Dionysius of Halicarnassus and Plutarch among the Greeks, L. Annaeus Seneca and the younger Pliny among the Romans, to say nothing of the poetical epistles of
1 It was therefore an extremely promising subject that the Philosophical Faculty of Heidelberg set for a prize competition in 1898-9: ‘‘ On the basis of a chronological review of Greek private letters recently discovered in papyri, to describe and exhibit historically the forms of Greek epistolary style.” The subject was worked out by G. A. Gerhard, but of his work only a portion was published (cf. above, p. 151, n. 3). Cf. moreover the valuable work of Ziemann, already mentioned; also Wendland, Hellenistisch-vomische Kultur®3, Ὁ. 411 ff.; and A. Calderini and M. Mondini, Repeviorio per lo studio delle lettere private dell’ Egitto Greco-Romano (Studi della Scuola Papirologica II. 109 ff.), Milano, 1917.
2 Some day, when we possess exact chronological statistics of the formulae employed in ancient letters, we shall be better able to answer a whole series of hitherto unsolved problems relating to the Biblical and early Church writings, from the approximate chronology of the Second and Third Epistles of St. John (and so, indirectly, of the First Epistle and the Gospel of St. John) to the question of the authenticity of the epistle of Theonas to Lucianus (cf. Harnack, Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 11, 1886, cols. 319 ff. and Geschichte dey altchristlichen Literatur, I. p. 790; Bardenhewer, Geschichte dey althivchlichen Literatur, 11. p. 216 ff.), etc. On the other hand many of the early Christian letters that have come down to us through literary sources can be exactly dated, and thus enable us to draw conclusions as to the age of some papyri that have not yet been dated. ᾿
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 233
Lucilius, Horace, and Ovid. The epistle was especially frequent in the literature of magic and religion. Nor must we forget mention of one special feature in the literary history, 1.6. pseudonymous (or rather ‘‘ heteronymous’’) epistolo- graphy. Particularly under the successors of Alexander and in the early Empire numerous epistles were written under false names, not by swindlers, but by unknown men of letters who for some reason or other did not wish to mention their own names. They wrote “letters’’ of Demosthenes, of Aristotle and Alexander, of Cicero and Brutus. It would be a mistake to brand as downright forgeries these products of a literary instinct that was certainly not very sincere or powerful. It is certain that letters were forged, but it is equally certain that most “‘ pseudonymous”’ epistles are
witnesses to a very widespread and unobjectionable literary habit.
6. What is the use to us of this distinction between letter and epistle, to which we have been led by the ancient letters on lead, papyrus, and earthenware ?
The New Testament contains a considerable number of texts, larger or smaller, calling themselves “ Letters ’— “Letters” of Paul, of James, of Peter, etc. Fresh from our consideration of the ancient letters and epistles, we are at once alive to the problem: Are the “ Letters” of the New Testament (and further, of early Christianity in general) non-literary letters or literary epistles? The fact that all these “΄ letters” have been handed down by literary tradition and were first seen by all of us collected in a book, might long deceive us as to the existence of the problem. Most scholars regard all these texts unhesitatingly as works of literature. But now that the new discoveries of letters have shown the necessity of differentiation, and have given us a standard for judging whether an ancient text is letter- like in character, the problem can no longer be kept in the background. And I think the study of these ancient letters, newly discovered, obliges us to maintain that in the New Testament there are ‘both non-literary letters and literary epistles,
1 Cf. Bibelstudien, Ὁ. 199 ff.; Bible Studies, Ὁ. 12 ff.
234 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST.
The letters of Paul are not literary; they are real letters, not epistles; they were written by Paul not for the public and posterity, but for the persons to whom they are addressed. Almost all the mistakes that have ever been made in the study of St. Paul’s life and work have arisen from neglect of the fact that his writings are non-literary and letter-like in character. His letter to the Romans, which for special inherent reasons is the least like a letter, has determined the criticism of all his other letters. But we must not begin our discussion of the question how far Paul’s letters are true letters by examining the one to the Romans. We must begin with the other letters, whose nature is obvious at first sight. The more we have trained ourselves, by reading other ancient letters, to appreciate the true characteristics of a letter, the more readily shall we perceive the relationship of Paul’s letters to the other non-literary texts of the period.
Paul’s letter to Philemon is no doubt the one most clearly seen to be a letter. Only the colour-blindness of pedantry could possibly regard this delightful little letter as a treatise “On the attitude of Christianity to slavery.’’ In its inter- cession for a runaway it is exactly parallel to the letter, quoted above, from the Papas of Hermupolis to the officer Abinnaeus. Read and interpreted as a letter this un- obtrusive relic from the age of the first witnesses is one of the most valuable self-revelations that the great apostle has left us: brotherly feeling, quiet beauty, tact as of a man of the world—all these are discoverable in the letter.
If, as seems to me probable for substantial reasons, the 16th chapter of Romans was specially written by Paul to be sent fo Ephesus, we have in it a text about which there can be no doubt that it is letter-like in character. It is easy to produce parallels from the papyrus letters, especially for the one most striking peculiarity of this letter, viz. the apparently monotonous cumulation of greetings. There is, for instance, Tasucharion’s letter to her brother Nilus 3 (Fayam, second century A.D.) and the letter of Ammonius to his sister, Tachnumi*® (Egypt, Imperial period). Their
1 Cf. Wilhelm Baur, Der Umgang des Christen mit den Menschen, Neue Christoterpe, Bremen und Leipzig, 1895, p. 151.
2 Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 601.
8 Paris Papyrus, No. 18 (Notices et extraits des manuscrits de la biblio- théque imp., t. XVIII. 2, p. 232 £.); Bibelstudien, p. 215 f.; not in Bible Studies.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 235
resemblance to Romans xvi. is most striking; Paul, however, enlivens the monotony of the long list of greetings by finely discriminative personal touches.1 So too there is no lack of analogies for a letter of recommendation plunging at once in medias res and beginning with “ I commend.” ?
In opposition to the Ephesian hypothesis it is usual to ask, How came this little letter to Ephesus to be united with the long letter to Rome as handed down to us? This question can perhaps be advanced a little by reference to ancient customs of letter-writing. We knew already that letter- books were in use in antiquity, containing either copies of the letters sent? or collections of letters received.4 We now possess a number of interesting papyrus fragments of letter copy-books: among others® one of the Ptolemaic period, now in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, with copies of letters from an official®; one of the year 104 A.D., also with official documents (two letters and one rescript), now in the British Museum’; and one from Hermupolis Magna,
1 The long list of greetings has, by the way, survived in precisely similar form in the epistolary style of the Mediterranean world down to the present day. Examples: the Coptic letter of ‘‘ poor’’ Athanasius, bishop of Tapotheca (18th and rgth cent. a.p.), in Crum, Catalogue of the Coptic Manuscripts in the Collection of the John Rylands Libvary, Manchester, No. 461 (p. 231 ff.); and a letter in my possession from a South Italian naval stoker (postmark, R. Nave Amalfi, 7 Oct., 1913), which in form and contents reflects altogether unchanged the ancient popular characteristics. Michele Petrone, to whom I showed this letter, said that during the war he read a great many similar letters, especially from the sons of Italian peasants. The Russian peasant letter shows the same peculiarity : the principal contents consist not of news but of greetings (Eugen Mayer, Frankfurter Zeitung, 5 April, 1922).
3 The letters in Epistolographi Graect, rec. Hercher, p. 259 (Dion to Rufus) and p. 699 (Synesius to Pylaemenes) begin, like Rom. xvi., with συνίστημι.
3 Libyi litterarum missarum. References in Wilcken, Archiv fiir Papyrus- forschung, I, p. 372; and in Otto Seeck, Die Briefe des Libanius zettlich geordnet, Texte und Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der altchristlichen Literatur, New Series, 15, 1, Leipzig, 1906, p. 19 ff., and Studien zu Synesios, Philologus 52 (1893), pp. 442-483; G. Griitzmacher, Synesios von Kyrene, Leipzig, 1913, p. II.
4 Libri litterarum adlatarum, References in Wilcken, Archiv, 1, p. 372. Of special interest is a papyrus roll at Vienna, consisting entirely of different letters to the same addressee stuck together. Also in the Berliner Griechische Urkunden, Nos. 1203-1209, we have letters of the years 29-23 B.C. stuck together. ο-. ;
5 Wilcken (Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung, 5, p. 221) mentions also the Lille Papyrus No. 3 (c. 241-240 B.c.) and the papyrus in Mélanges Nicole, Genéve, 1905, p. 58 ff. :
8. Edited by John P. Mahaffy, cf. Wilcken, Archiv, 1, p. 168.
7 Greek Papyri, Vol. III. No. 904, p. 124 ff., with facsimile (Plate 30). A portion of this fragment (the rescript) is given below, Fig. 51, facing p. 271.
235 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
of the beginning of the second century A.D., now in the Heidelberg University Library,! with copies of three letters from one Heliodorus? to Eutychides, Anubas, and Phibas, each of whom he calls “‘ brother.” These three letters are written in three parallel columns in the same hand; the upper margin contains in each case the praescript, ‘‘ Heliodorus to N. N., his brother, greeting.”’
Now we know that St. Paul did not write his letters with his own hand, but dictated them.? The handwriting of the originals and of the letter copy-books, if such existed, will therefore have varied in appearance with the amanuensis. The little letter to Ephesus was written by a certain Tertius,4 and the letter to Rome, being of the same date, would no doubt be written by the same Tertius and stand in his hand- writing next to the Ephesian letter in the copy-book. In making a transcript from the copy-book it was the easier. for the two letters in the same hand to run into one another because in the copy-book the praescripts were generally abbreviated.5 And how easily might any upper margin, containing the praescript, break off! Just look, for example, once more at the letter of Justinus.6 When once the prae- script was gone, however, the two letters would fall into one.? But even if we assume that St. Paul’s letters were reproduced not from copy-books but from the originals, the two letters might easily have become confused owing to the similarity of the handwriting.®
The two “ Epistles to the Corinthians”’ that have come
1 Provisional number 22; not yet published.
2 Letters from other members of this man’s family are preserved in the Amherst Papyri, Nos. 131-135. Heliodorus himself is mentioned there more than once. There are other letters of his at Heidelberg.
3 Cf. above, pp. 166, n. 7; 171f.
4 Rom. xvi. 22.
5 Wilcken, Archiv, 1, p. 168.
& No. 23, with facsimile, Fig. 42, p. 216 above.
1 There is perhaps a case of this kind in the unpublished Heidelberg papyrus No. 87. This also belongs to the correspondence of Heliodorus and contains a letter from him to his father Sarapion in one wide column. To the right are visible remains of a second column; the right-hand margin has been torn . away. Was there a second praescript at the top of the second column? If so, the papyrus must be part of a second letter copy-book belonging to Heliodorus. Cf. also p. 206, note 1 above.
® The question of the technique followed in the compilation of ancient collections of letters will have to be gone into some day in its widest connexions.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 237
down to us also belong to the group of real letters. What is it that makes. the second Epistle so extremely unintelligible to many people? Simply the fact that it is out-and-out a letter, full of allusions which we for the most part no longer fully understand. St. Paul wrote this letter with the full strength of his personality, putting into it all the varied emotions that succeeded and encountered one another in his capacious soul—deep contrition and thankfulness towards . God, the reformer’s wrath, irony and trenchant candour towards the vicious. The first ‘‘ Epistle to the Corinthians ” is calmer in tone because the situation of the letter is different, but this also is no pamphlet addressed to the Christian public, but a real letter to Corinth, in part an answer to a letter from the church there.
The two “‘ Epistles to the Thessalonians ’’ are also genuine letters, the first even more so than the second. Written in comparative composure of mind, they represent, one might say, the average type of a Pauline letter.
The “ Epistle to the Galatians,” on the other hand, is the offspring of passion, a fiery utterance of chastisement and defence, not at all a treatise ‘‘ De lege et evangelio,” the reflection rather of a genius flashing like summer lightning.
The “letters of the captivity,” of which we have already mentioned that to Philemon, will perhaps gain most in mean- ing when treated seriously as letters. We shall come more and more, as we weigh the epistolary possibilities and prob- abilities of actual letter-writing, to shift the problem of their date and origin from the profitless groove into which the alternative “ Rome or Caesarea’ must lead; we shall try to solve it by. the assumption that Colossians, Philemon, and the “Epistle to the Ephesians ” (Laodiceans), and also Philip- pians were written during an imprisonment at Ephesus 1 (or various periods of arrest in Asia). The contrast both in subject and style which has been observed between Colossians
1 The careful reader of St. Paul’s letters will easily find evidences of an imprisonment of St. Paul at Ephesus.—I may remark, in answer to a reviewer of the first edition, that I do not owe this hypothesis (which has meanwhile met with a number of ingenious champions in the case of Philippians) to H. Lisco’s book, Vincula Sanctorum, Berlin, 1900. I introduced it when lecturing at the Theological Seminary at Herborn in 1897, with application to Colossians, Philemon, and Ephesians.
238 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
and Ephesians on the one hand and the rest of the Pauline Epistles on the other is likewise explained by the situation of those letters. Paul is writing to churches that were not yet known to him personally, and what seems epistle-like in the two letters ought really to be described as their reserved, impersonal tone. The greatest stone of offence has always been the relationship between the contents of the two texts. Now I for my part see no reason why Paul should not repeat in one “ epistle ”’ what he had already said in another; but all astonishment ceases when we observe that we have here a missionary sending letters simultaneously to two different churches that he is anxious to win. The situation is the same in both cases, and he treats practically the same questions in like manner in each letter. The difference, however, is ‘after all so great that he asks the two churches to exchange their letters.1 The most remarkable thing to me is the peculiar liturgical fervour of the two letters, but this is the resonance of notes that are occasionally struck in other Pauline letters and which are not’ without analogies in contemporary. texts of solemn import in non-Christian cults.
The ‘ Epistle to the Philippians,” most gracious of all St. Paul’s writings to the churches, is obviously letter-like. As already hinted, the question of where it was written stands also in great need of re-examination, for statistics carefully compiled from inscriptions and papyri would show that “praetorium ’’? and “‘ Caesar’s household,’ * which have hitherto always been taken to indicate Rome, are by no means necessarily distinctive of the capital.
The Ephesian theory of St. Paul’s prison writings, suggested by a consideration of the probabilities of actual letter-writing, opens up new possibilities of accounting for the Pastoral Epistles, or at least some of them. The chief problem lies not in their language or the teaching contained in them, but in the circumstances under which the letters. were written,
1 Col. iv. 16.
? Phil. i. 13. A beginning of such statistics was made by Theodor Momm- sen, Hermes, 35 (1900) pp. 437-442.
3 Phil. iv. 22. This does not refer to the palace (there were imperial palaces elsewhere than in Rome), but to the body of imperial slaves, scattered all over the world. We have evidence of imperial slaves even at Ephesus.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 239
the journeys that must be presupposed, and other external events in the lives of the apostle and his companions.
In the case of ‘‘ Romans ’”’ one might at first be in doubt whether it were a letter or an epistle.1 At any rate its letter-like character is not so obvious as that of 2 Corinthians. Yet it is not an epistle addressed to all the world or even to Christendom, containing, let us say, a compendium of St. Paul’s dogmatic and ethical teaching. Its mere length must not be held an argument against its letter-like character : 2 there are long letters,? as well as short epistles. ‘‘ Romans” is along letter. St. Paul wishes to pave the way for his visit to the Roman Christians; that is the object of his letter. The missionary from Asia does not yet know the Western Church, and is known to it only by hearsay. The letter therefore cannot be so full of personal details as those which the apostle wrote to churches long familiar to him. ‘“‘ Romans” may strike many at first as being more of an epistle than a letter, but on closer examination this explains itself from the circumstances of writing. Here also, therefore, if we would understand its true significance, we must banish all thought of things literary.4 Not even the oldest codices of the New Testament, to say nothing of printed editions, give a perfectly correct idea of the spirit of this text. What was originally non-literary has there by subsequent development become literary. Early in the fourth century a Christian at Oxy- rhynchus—his name was probably Aurelius Paulus—copied the beginning of Romans for some private purpose, very
1 Cf. also the examination of this question by M. J. Lagrange, The Con- structive Quarterly 3 (1915) p. 501 ff.
2 Cf. Bibelstudien, p. 237; Bible Studies, p. 45.
8 E.g. the petition of Dionysia to the Praefect, Oxyrhynchus Papyri, No. 237 (186 a.D.) is not much shorter than the Epistle to the Romans. This gigantic letter, between two and three yards long, gives one a good idea of the probable outward appearance of St. Paul’s “‘ long ” letters—great rolls made of single-column sheets stuck together.
4 Wilhelm Bousset (Theologische Literaturzeitung, 22, 1897, col. 358) says admirably: ‘‘ Paul’s Epistles—even that to the Romans—must be read as outpourings from the heart of an impulsive prophet-like personality, and not as dialectic didactic writings.” Similarly Adolf Jiilicher in the Gegenwarts- bibel (Die Schriften des Neuen Testaments neu iibersetzt und fur die Gegenwart erklart, herausgegeben von Johannes Weiss, II. 2, Gottingen, 1905, p. 2): “The Epistle to the Romans remains a letter not only in form but in essence... .”
΄
240 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
likely for use as an amulet, on a sheet of papyrus that is now in the Semitic Museum of Harvard University (Fig. 46). The coarse, rustic, non-litetary uncials in which he wrote, or got somebody to write, are more in keeping with St. Paul’s letter than the book-hand of episcopally trained scribes. Those powerful lines assume once more the simple garb they probably wore in the autograph of Tertius written from Paul’s dictation at Corinth.
Taking one thing with another I have no hesitation: in maintaining the thesis that all the letters of Paul are real, non-literary letters? St. Paul was not a writer of epistles but of letters; he was not a literary man. His letters were raised to the dignity of literature afterwards, when the piety of the churches collected them, multiplied them by copying and so made them accessible to the whole of Christendom. Later still they became sacred literature, when they were received among the books of the ‘‘ New” Testament then in process of formation; and in this position their literary influence has been immeasurable. But all these subsequent experiences cannot change the original character of Paul’s letters. Paul, whose yearning and ardent hope expected the Lord, and with Him the Judgment and the world to come— Paul, who reckoned the future of “this”? world not by centuries and millenniums but by years, had no presentiment of the providence that watched over the fate of his letters in the world’s history. He wrote with absolute abandon, more so than Augustine in >is Confessions, more than the other great teachers 5. in their letters, which not infrequently are
1 The Oxyrhynchus Papyri, No. 209. The facsimile (Fig. 46) is reproduced by kind permission of the Egypt Exploration Fund. Cf. my discussion of the papyrus in the Theologische Literaturzeitung, 26 (1901) col. 71f. After a long study of early Christian amulets, I now prefer the theory that the papyrus served as an amulet for the Aurelius Paulus who is named in a cursive hand beneath the text from Romans. The folds also favour this explanation. ᾿
2 Cf. the fine observations of Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Die griechische Literatur des Altertums, Die Kultuy dey Gegenwart, Teil I. Abteilung 8, 2 Auflage, Berlin und Leipzig, 1907, p. 159f., and of Johannes Weiss in the Gegenwarisbibel, II. 1, pp. 1 ff.
3 Again and again in conversation I have been reminded of the epistle-like character of so many “ letters”’ of the Fathers, and a similar character has been claimed for the letters of Paul. But it is quite mistaken to attempt to judge Paul’s letters by the standard of later degenerations from the type.
‘puny ποι 1ο] ΧΉ 4dA3q 981 10 uoisstuied Ag ᾿Αγι5αθλίπῃ preareH jo wINasNy] OIZWES 91 Ul MON ‘av 1190 τ} 912 10 ϑατατιϑοα ‘snyouAyIAxQ Woz snifdeg “pury o4sni Ἔ ur 5ΙΈΙΠΟΣ 911 0} aysidy 911 10 591Π|Ὶ 1511 91
1. το 517
wey if eres 5 LAP PELL R 2 popRA
spas το
4 y
cn ΤῊΣ
5 Ἔν ἴω
Is :
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 241
calculated for publication as well as for the immediate recipient.
This abandon constitutes the chief value of the letters of St. Paul. Their non-literary characteristics as letters are a guarantee of their reliability, their positively documentary value for the history of the apostolic period of our religion, particularly the history of St. Paul himself and his great mission. His letters simply ave ‘document ’’—original tidings.1_ They are the remains, scanty it is true, but contain- ing the essential part, of the records of the propaganda of the cult of Christ—just as the letter of Zoilus,? lately come to light, represents a missionary document of the cult of Serapis. The exegesis of St. Paul’s letters therefore becomes spontane- ously a matter of psychological reproduction, justice being done to the ebb and flow of the writer’s temporary moods. The single confessions in the letters of a nature so impulsive as St. Paul’s were dashed down under the influence of a hundred various impressions, and were never calculated for systematic presentment. The strange attempt to paste them together mechanically, in the belief that thus Paulinism might be reconstructed, will have to be given up. Thus Paulinism will become more enigmatical, but Paul himself will be seen more clearly; a non-literary man of the non-literary class in the Imperial age, but, prophet-like in personality, rising above his class and surveying the contemporary educated world with the consciousness of superior strength. All the traces of systematisation that are found here and there in him are proofs of the limitation of his genius; the secret of his greatness lies in religion apart from system.?
There are two more real letters in. the New Testament, viz. 2 and 3 John. Of the third Epistle I would say with
Paul wrote under circumstances that could not be repeated, circumstances that preclude all possibility of playing with publicity or with posterity: he wrote in expectation of the end of the world.
1 [A pun in the German: Uvkunde = ‘‘ document,” but it is spelt here Ur-Kunde, “ original tidings; pristine knowledge.” TR.]
2 Letter No. 2 above, p. 152. ᾿
81 refer to my book, Paulus. Eine kultur- und religionsgeschichtliche Skizze, Tiibingen, 1911, #1925 (S¢. Paul, translated by Lionel R. M. Strachan, London, 1912; 2nd ed. by William E. Wilson, 1926; in Swedish, in shorter form, Stockholm, 1910, #1918).
242 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff 1: “It was entirely a private note . . . ; it must have been preserved among the papers of Gaius as a relic of the great presbyter.” * The second Epistle of St. John is not so full of letter-like detail as the third, but it too has a quite definite purpose as a letter,
although we cannot say with complete certainty who the: lady was to whom it was addressed. That it was addressed to the whole church seems to me quite impossible. The two letters are of especial interest because they clearly show in several instances a peculiar type of epistolary style, concern- ing which it is to be hoped that, with the aid of the papyri,
we shall some day be able to set the bounds of its date more exactly.
7. With the same certainty with which we describe the Pauline and two Johannine epistles as real non-literary letters, we recognise in other New Testament texts literary epistles, most clearly in the Epistles of James, Peter, and Jude,? which have from ancient times been known as “ catholic”
r ‘‘ general.””* A glance at the ‘“ addressees ’’ shows that these are not real letters. Impossible demands are made of the “bearer” if we are to imagine one. A “letter,” for instance, superscribed ‘“‘to the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad’ would be simply undeliverable. James, in whose praescript we find this ‘‘ address,”’ writes as does the author of the Epistle of Baruch “ to the nine-and-a-half tribes that are in-captivity.’”’ In these cases we have to do not with definite addressees but with a great “ catholic ”’ circle of readers. The authors did not despatch a single copy of their “ letter,’ as St. Paul did of “ Philippians,” for example: they published a number of copies of a pamphlet. .
The Epistle of James is from the beginning literary, a pamphlet addressed to the whole of Christendom, a veritable
1 Lesefriichte, Hermes, 33 (1898) p. 529ff. This essay is especially instructive on points of style.
2 Page 531. ἡ ‘i
* Cf. the excellent remarks of Georg Hollmann and Hermann Gunkel in the Gegenwartsbibel, II. 3, pp. 1 and 25.
‘ This old designation includes by implication the essential part of our observations.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 243
epistle. The whole of its contents agrees therewith. There is none of the unique detail peculiar to the situation, such as we have in the letters of St. Paul, but simply general questions, most of them still conceivable under the present conditions of our church life. But the Epistle of James is nevertheless a product of popular literature. The Epistles of Peter and of Jude have also purely idealised addresses; the letter-like touches are merely decorative. Here we have the beginnings of a Christian literature; the Epistles of Jude and Peter, though still possessing as a whole many popular features, already endeavour here and there to attain a certain degree of artistic expression. .
The question of the “‘ authenticity ” of all these epistles is, from our point of view, not nearly so important as it would certainly be if they were real letters. The personality of the authors recedes almost entirely into the background. A great cause is speaking to us, not a clearly definable personality, such as we see in the letters of St Paul, and it is of little importance to the understanding of the text whether we know the names of the writers with certainty or not. From our knowledge of the literary habits of antiquity, as well as on general historical grounds, we are bound to regard the catholic epistles first and foremost as epistles issued under a protecting name, and may therefore call them, in the good sense of the word, heteronymous.
It is very noteworthy in this connexion that the longest “epistle’”’ in the New Testament, the so-called Epistle to the Hebrews, is altogether anonymous, as it has come down to us. Even the “ address ’’ has vanished. Were it not for some details in xiii. 22-24 that sound letter-like, one would never suppose that the work was meant to be an epistle, not to mention a letter. Jt might equally well be an oration or a “diatribe ’’;4 it calls itself a “word of exhortation τ᾿ (xiii. 22). It is clear from this example how in epistles all that seems letter-like is mere ornament ; if any of the ornament crumbles off, the character of the whole thing is not essentially altered. Failure to recognise the literary character of the Epistle to the Hebrews has led to a large number of super-
1 [In the sense of “ disquisition ’’ or “ critical discussion.” The word is ambiguous in German as well as in English. ΤᾺ.
244 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
fluous hypotheses about the ‘‘addressees,” etc.,1 and the fact has been overlooked that the Epistle gains immensely in importance if really considered as literature : it is historically the earliest example of Christian artistic literature. What had been shyly attempted in some other epistles has here been more fully carried out. Alike in form and contents this epistle strives to rise from the stratum in which Christianity had its origin towards the higher level of learning and culture.
The so-called “ First Epistle of St. John ” has none of the ~ specific characters of an epistle, and is, of course, even less like a letter. The little work has got along with the epistles, but it is best described as a religious ‘‘ diatribe,’ in which Christian meditations are loosely strung together for the benefit of the community of the faithful.
The “ Apocalypse of John,” however, is strictly speaking an epistle : it has ini. 4 an epistolary praescript with a religious wish, and in xxii. 21 a conclusion suitable for an epistle. The -epistle is again subdivided at the beginning into seven small portions addressed to the churches of Asia—Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, Laodicea. These again are not real letters, sent separately to the respective churches and afterwards collected together. All seven of them, rather, have been written with an eye to the whole, and are to be read and taken to heart by all the churches, not only by the one named in the address. They represent, however, in my opinion, a more letter-like species of epistle than those we have been considering hitherto. The writer wishes to achieve certain ends with the single churches, but at the same time to influence the whole body of Christians, or at any rate Asiatic Christians. In spite, therefore, of their familiar form his missives have a public and literary purpose, and hence they are more correctly ranged with the early Christian epistles than with the letters. They belong more-
1 Cf. William Wrede, ‘‘ Das literarische Ratsel des Hebrderbriefs. Mit einem Anhang iber den literarischen Charakter des Barnabasbriefs " (Part 8 of the ‘‘ Forschungen,” edited by W. Bousset and H. Gunkel), Géttingen, 1906. Wrede agrees with my view. As he very well puts it (p. 73), ‘‘ The main . point in the end is to recognise the whole epistle as a literary work.” In recent works on Hebrews this problem has received abundant consideration; cf. for instance its profound treatment by Eduard Riggenbach in Zahn’s Kommentar zum Neuen Testament, vol. 145,8, Leipzig, 1922, p. xii ff.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 245
over to a large species of religious epistolography, which still plays an important part in the popular religion of the present day,! viz. the “ letters from heaven.” 2
8. Having clearly worked out the difference between the non-literary letter and the literary epistle, we are now able to attempt a sketch of the literary development of Primitive Christianity. If in doing so we speak of times or periods, we do not mean to imply that sharp chronological divisions are possible.
Christianity, then, does not begin as a literary movement. Its creative period is non-literary.
Jesus of Nazareth is altogether unliterary. He never wrote? or dictated a line. He depended entirely on the living word, full of a great confidence that the scattered seed would spring up. Always speaking face to face with His friends, never separated from them by the ocean, He had no need to write letters. In His rural homeland He wanders from village to village and from one little town to another, preaching in a boat or in synagogues or on a sunlit hill, but never do we find Him in the shade of the writing-room. Excelling them of old time in reverence_as in all things else, He would not have ventured to take the prophet’s pen and add new “ Scriptures ”’ to the old, for the new thing for which He looked came not in book, formulae, and subtle doctrine, but in spirit and in fire.
Side by side with Jesus there stands, equally non-literary,
1 In May 1906 I bought at Athens for 5 lepta a reprint of a “‘ letter of Christ ’’ that was being sold in the streets together with lives of saints: ᾿Ἐπιστολὴ τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ εὑρεθεῖσα ἐπὶ τοῦ τάφου τῆς θεοτόκου, “Letter of our Lord Jesus Christ, found on the grave of the Mother of God.” During the Great War “‘ letters from heaven ” played a prodigious part.
2 Cf. on this subject Albrecht Dieterich, Blatter fiir hessische Volks- kunde, 3 (1901) No. 3, and Hessische Blatter fiir Volkskunde, 1 (1902) p. 19 ff.; V. G. Kirchner, Wider die Himmelsbriefe, Leipzig-Gohlis, 1908 (wages war of extermination against these “letters from heaven’’); W. Kohler, ‘‘ Briefe von Himmel und Briefe aus der Hille,’ Die Geisteswissenschaf- ten 1 (1913-14) pp. 588 ff., 619 ff.,and Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart, 3, col, 29 ff.; R. Stiibe, Der Himmelsbrief in der Religionsgeschichte, Tubingen, 1918; Gressmann, Sitzungsberichte. der Akademie der Wissenschaften, Berlin, 1921, p. 620 ff.—As a new example No. 23 of the Odes of Solomon is worth noting. ;
3 [The writing in John viii. 6, 8 was not literary, Tr.]
246 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
His apostle. Even from the hand of St. Paul we should possess not a line, probably, if he had remained, like his Master, in retirement. But the Spirit drove the cosmopolite back into the Diaspora. The great world-centres on the roads and on the coasts become homes of the gospel, and if the. artisan-missionary at Ephesus wishes to talk to the foolish Galatians or the poor brethren at Corinth, then in the midst of the hurry and worry of pressing daily duties he dictates a letter, adding at the end a few lines roughly written with his own hard and weary weaver’s hand.! These were no books or pamphlets for the world or even for Christendom; they were confidential pronouncements, of whose existence and contents the missionary’s nearest companions often knew nothing: Luke even writes his Acts of the Apostles without
knowledge of the letters of St. Paul (which were written but
not yet published). But the lack of all publicist intention,
the complete absence of literary pose, the contempt of the
stylist’s sounding phrase,—this it was that predestined St.
Paul’s unbookish lines, so unassuming and yet written with
such powerful originality, to literary fortunes of truly world-
wide import to history. They were to become a centre of
energy for the future, influencing leading men and books and
civilisations down to the present day.
Such sayings of the non-literary Jesus as have been re- ported to us by others, and such non-literary letters as remain to us of St. Paul’s, show us that Christianity in its earliest creative period was most closely bound up with the lower classes and had as yet no effective connexion with the small upper class possessed of power and culture. Jesus is more in
1 When I first wrote these lines I was unconsciously expressing myself quite in the manner of the apostolic age, even as to form. Thus, according to Eusebius (Eccl. Hist. 111. xx. 3), did the relatives of Jesus describe themselves before Domitian: εἶτα δὲ καὶ τὰς χεῖρας τὰς ἑαυτῶν ἐπιδεικνύναι, μαρτύριον τῆς αὐτουργίας τὴν τοῦ σώματος σκληρίαν καὶ τοὺς ἀπὸ τῆς συνεχοῦς ἐργασίας ἐναποτυπω- θέντας ἐπὶ τῶν ἰδίων χειρῶν τύλους παριστάντας, “ then showed they also their hands and, as a witness of their working themselves, the hard places on their bodies and the callosities that had come impressed upon their hands by continual labour.”
2 One of the worst blunders ever made by criticism was to explain the particularly clear tokens of this connexion as later Ebionite interpolations. But even if we surrendered to these critics all that Jesus says about mammon, ‘we shall still, for linguistic and other reasons, be bound to maintain our thesis,
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 247
company with the small peasants and townsmen of a rural civilisation—the people of the great city have rejected Him; St. Paul goes rather with the citizens and artisans of the great international cities1; but both Jesus and St. Paul are full of magnificent irony and lofty contempt where the upper classes are concerned. But the conventional language of rural civilisations is always the simpler, and therefore the popular standard and popular elements are seen much more clearly in Jesus than in St. Paul. Paul’s letters, however, are also popular in tone. This is most conspicuous in his vocabulary, but even the subject-matter is adapted to the problems, difficulties, and weaknesses of humble individuals. Only, of course, a man of St. Paul’s greatness has knowledge beyond the thousand-word vocabulary 2 of (say) a mere loafer at the docks, leading a vegetable existence, and with no religion except a belief in daemons. St. Paul has a poet’s mastery of language, he experiences with unabated force in the depths of his prophet-soul the subtlest, tenderest emotions known in the sphere of religion and morals, and he reveals his experience in the personal confessions contained in his letters.
The creative, non-literary period is followed by the con- servative, literary period, but this receives its immediate stamp from the motive forces of the former epoch. The earliest Christian literature is of a popular kind, not artistic literature ὃ. for the cultured.‘ Τί either creates a simple form for itself (the gospel), or it employs the most artless forms
1 The whole history of Primitive Christianity and the growth of the New Testament might be sketched from this point of view. [Cf. the author’s article in The Expositor, February to April 1909, ‘‘ Primitive Christianity and the Lower Classes.”’ TR.]
2 [The ‘‘thousand”’ should not be thought of literally. Otto Jespersen, Language, London, 1922, p. 126, points out the absurdity of the myth (to which Max Miller gave currency) that an English farm labourer has only about 300 words at command. Minute investigation shows the vocabulary ~ of Swedish peasants to amount to at least 26,000 words. TR.] ᾿
3 At the present day it is possible for literature to be both popular, in the above sense, and artistic, viz. when it imitates consciously the forms which have grown up naturally in popular books.
4 Cf. Georg Heinrici in ‘‘ Theologische Abhandlungen Carl von Weizsdcker .. . gewidmet,” Freiburg i. B., 1892, p. 329: ‘‘ The New Testament writings are distinguished by a far-reaching neglect of the laws that were recognised throughout the classical world as governing artistic representation.”
248 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
assumed by Jewish or pagan prose (the chronicle, apocalypse, epistle, ‘‘ diatribe”’). The popular features exhibited are of two kinds, corresponding to the characteristic difference that struck us when comparing Jesus and St. Paul: we have on the one hand the influence of the country and provincial towns, on the other hand that of the great towns predominating.
The synoptic gospels, themselves based on earlier little books, exhibit the local colour of the Galilean and Palestinian countryside; the great city, in which the catastrophe occurs, stands in frightful contrast to all the rest. The Epistle of St. James will be best understood in the open air beside the piled sheaves of a harvest field; it is the first powerful echo of the still recent synoptic gospel-books.
St. Luke dedicates his books to a man of polish, but this does not make them polite literature. Here and there the language of his gospel, and more especially the style and subject-matter of his book of apostolic history, mark the transition to the popular books in which the cosmopolite tone prevails. To this latter class belong, so it seems to me, the Epistle of Jude, the Epistles of Peter, and the book of the seven cities (Revelation of St. John). This last is particularly popular in character, written with the passionate earnestness of a prophet who speaks the popular language of his time, and is familiar with the images created by the popular imagination of-the East.?
The Gospel of St. John, in spite of the Logos in the opening lines,’ is altogether popular, and so is the “‘ diatribe ” which goes under the name of the First Epistle of St. John. These
1 I hope nobody will suppose that I intend to hint at any difference of value between these two classes.
2 A sharp eye trained by the study of Direr and Rembrandt sees clearly the marked popular character of this picture-book. This was shown me by a remark in a letter from Prof. Carl Neumann, of Kiel, dated Gottingen, 6 March, 1905: ‘‘In one of my Gptungen semesters I studied the Apocalypse with Albrecht Diirer and then read ’scommentary. Putting aside the thousand and one pros and cons and questions about sources, and looking at the effect of the whole, as the commentator is no longer naive enough to do, I must say I have never come across a work of such coloristic power in the contrasts, I might even say of such tremendous instrumentation. There is something of barbaric unrestraint about it all.”
3 Cf. p. 69 f. above.
4 This sentence contains obviously, in. concisest form, a whole programme of work to be carried out, which has, however, engaged my attention for thirty
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 249
Johannine texts are still most decidedly popular works, but they are neither. decidedly rural nor decidedly urban; rural and urban, synoptic and Pauline are united together into what I should call intercultural, oecumenical Christian characteristics.
After this the production of popular Christian literature never ceased. It runs through the centuries. Often it went on as it were subterraneously, in holes and corners, in secret conventicles —from the earliest known texts of vulgar Latin, the Muratorian Canon, and the swarm of late gospels, “acts,” and ‘‘ revelations ’’ which are branded as apocryphal, to the books of martyrdoms, legends of saints, and pilgrimages, —from the postils, consolatories, and tractates down to the vast modern polyglot of missionary and edifying literature. Even to-day the greatest part of this popular literature perishes after serving its purpose. The dullest book of pro- fessorial hypothesis in theology, which nobody ever will read, finds a place in our libraries, but books of prayer that served whole generations for edification become literary rarities after a hundred years. Thus of the whole vast mass of Christian popular literature of all times only a scanty remnant has come down to us, and even this is almost stifled by the volume of learned theological literature, which has pushed itself, bulky and noisy, into the foreground.
If we trace this technical literature of theology back to its beginnings we come to the Epistle to the Hebrews, a work which seems to hang in the background like an intruder among the New Testament company of popular books. It marks an epoch in the literary development of Christianity inasmuch as it is the first tolerably clear example of a litera- ture which still, like the older popular writings, appealed only to Christians and not to the whole, world, but was consciously dictated by theological interests, and dominated (quite unlike the letters of Paul) by theological methods, and the endeavour to attain beauty of form. Christianity has moved from its native stratum and is seeking to acquire culture.
years. In opposition to the widespread and widely prevalent view of the Johannine texts which emphasises their aristocratic and doctrinaire features it is time to do justice to their no less marked popular character and intimate connexion with the cult.
250 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
It was but a step from this artistic literature for Christians to artistic literature for the world, such as the apologists of the second century produced. The subsequent lines of this development are well known.
But before Christian literature ventured on this great step into the world, the pristine inheritance was separated off from the books of the after-generation by the insurmountable barrier of a new canon. The formation of the New Testa- ment is the most important event in the literary history of mankind: wherein lay its significance, merely as regards literature? - It meant, in the first place, the preservation of the relics of the past age. Secondly, that the non-literary part of these relics was raised to the rank of literature, and the impulse given to unite all the parts gradually into a single. book. Finally, that texts older than “the church” were elevated to standards for the church, and popular texts became a book for the world.1 The fact that scarcely any but popular and primitive Christian writings found their way into the nascent New Testament is a brilliant proof of the unerring tact of the Church that formed the Canon.
g. We have reached the end of a chapter, and if anyone should object that its results could all have been obtained without the aid of the inscriptions, papyri, and ostraca, it is not for me to enter an indignant denial. Speaking for my- self, however, I am bound to say that I had never grasped those main lines of the literary development of Christianity until I took up the study of the class of document we have been considering. Then it was that the great difference between literary and non-literary writing impressed itself on me, and 1 learnt from the papyrus letters to appreciate the characteristics of the non-literary letter.
From that time onward the literary history of Primitive Christianity stood out before me in all its grandeur.
It began without any written book at all. There was only the living word,—the gospel, but no gospels. Instead of the letter there was the spirit. The beginning, in fact, was Jesus Himself. This age of the spirit had not passed away
1 Just as, philologically, it meant that the vulgar language was elevated to the realm of things literary.
THE NEW TESTAMENT AS LITERATURE 251
before the apostle Paul was at work. He wrote his letters not to gain the ear of literary men, but to keep up confidential intercourse with undistinguished non-literary persons.
Next there sprang up among the Christian brotherhoods popular books with no pretensions to literary art. Yet these were the beginnings of Christian cult and propaganda literature, and the authors—evangelists, prophets, apostles—being them- selves men of the people, spoke and wrote the people’s language.
The Epistle to the Hebrews shows us Christianity preparing for a flight from its native levels into the higher region of culture, and we are conscious of the beginnings of a Christian world-literature. First, however, the new religion, reviewing its own initial stages, begins to collect the relics of that early period as a standard for the future.
The development of the literature is a reflex of the whole early history of Christianity. We watch the stages of growth from brotherhoods to church, from the unlearned to theo- logians, from the lower and middle classes to the upper world. It is one long process of cooling and hardening. If we still persist in falling back upon the New Testament after all these centuries, we do so in order to make the hardened metal fluid once more. The New Testament was edited and handed down by the Church, but there is none of the rigidity of the law about it, because the texts composing it are documents of a period antecedent to the Church, when our religion was still sustained by inspiration. The New Testament is a book, but not of your dry kind, for the texts composing it are still to-day, despite the tortures to which literary criticism has subjected them, living confessions of Christian inward- ness. And if, owing to its Greek idiom, the New Testament cannot dispense with learned interpreters. it is by no means a secret book for the few. The words in which it is written come from the souls of saints sprung from the people, and therefore the New Testament is the Bible for the many.
CHAPTER IV
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY IN THE NEW TESTAMENT, ILLUSTRATED FROM THE NEW TEXTS
1. In the days before the ancient inscriptions had sunk beneath the soil, when men still wrote on papyrus and potsherd, and the coins of the Roman Caesars were in daily circulation, Jesus of Galilee called for a silver denarius of Rome when He was disputing with His adversaries, and said, referring to the image and superscription on the coin, ‘‘ Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar’s; and unto God the things that are God’s.’’! It was an age which paid divine honour to the Caesar; Jesus showed no disrespect towards him, but by distinguishing so sharply between Caesar and God He made a tacit protest against the worship of the emperor.? That pregnant sentence does not present us with two equal magni- tudes, Caesar and God: the second is clearly the superior of the first; the sense is, ‘‘ Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's; and, a fortiori, unto God the things that are God’s.””3 The portrait and legend were an ocular demon- stration of the right. of the sovereign who coined the money to demand tribute from the provincials. The claims of God were in no sense affected, for they are high as the heavens above this world’s claims. Thus Jesus made use of the portrait and legend on a Roman coin to give a concrete,
1 Matt. xxii. 21, with the parallel passages.
2. That the coins in particular might well provoke a feeling of protest against the cult of the Caesar, is shown for instance by a denarius of Tiberius (Madden, Jewish Coinage, 247) with the inscription, Ti(berius) Caesay divi Aug(usti) f(tlius) Augustus, ‘ Tiberius Caesar Augustus, son of the divine Augustus,” cited by E. Klostermann, Handbuch zum Neuen Testament, 11. p. 103, on Mark xii. 16.
5 Cf. the remarks on the worship of the emperors, in ὃ 9 below, p. 338 ff. This explanation of the passage is exactly how the Christian woman Donata understands it, in the Acts of the Scilitanian Martyrs: honovem Caesari quasi Caesari ; timorem autem Deo, ‘‘ honour to Caesar as Caesar, but fear to God!" (Ausgewahlie Martyrerakien, herausg. von R. Knopf, Tiibingen, rgor, p. 35).
252
Fic. 47.—Marble Inscription from Cos, containing the title Ewergetes, circa 53 A.D Now in Sarrara Yussuf’s garden wall, in the town of Cos. By permission of Rudolf Herzog and the publishing house of Theodor Weicher (Dieterich’sche Verlagsbuchhandlung).
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 253
tangible answer to a question of the day involving religion and politics.
Some time later, on the eve of His martyrdom, in the trusted circle of His immediate disciples, Jesus referred to a secular custom, examples of which are derivable from literature 1 and most abundantly from inscriptions and coins of Greek- speaking lands—the custom of distinguishing princes and other eminent men with the honourable title of Euergetes, “benefactor.” 2 It would not be difficult to collect from inscriptions, with very little loss of time, over a hundred instances, so widespread was the custom. I give here one example only, of the same period as the evangelists. Gaius Stertinius Xenophon, body-physician to the Emperor Claudius, whom he afterwards poisoned, was contemporary with Jesus, and received from the people of Cos, probably about A.D. 53 in gratitude for his valuable services to his native island, the title of “‘ Benefactor.’ The title precedes his name, for instance, in a fragmentary inscription from Cos 3 (Figure 47), which was probably connected with some honour conferred on his wife : 4
τοῦ εὐεργέτ[α TI. Srep-] | .-....- of the benefactor twiov Ἐενοφῶντ[ος] G. Stertinius Xenophon, ... ἀνιερωθεῖσαν zat] consecrated to the city.
πόλει.
Jesus knew this custom of “the Gentiles’” most probably from Syrian and Phoenician coins® which circulated in Palestine, and it is, 1 think, justifiable to suppose that this common Greek title existed as a borrowed word in Aramaic. The Greek title in the mouth of Jesus is, like His words about the denarius, one of the instances in which we seem to hear
1 Cf. for instance the Old Testament Apocrypha.
2 Luke xxii. 25 f.
3 Discovered and published by Rudolf Herzog, Koische Forschungen und Funde, leipzig, 1899, p. 65 ff., Nos. 24, 25. The greatly reduced facsimile (Plate IV. 2, 3) is here reproduced (Fig. 47) by the kind permission of the discoverer and his publisher.
4 The upper fragment ITHIOYA is perhaps part of another inscription.
5 E.g. coins of the cities of Ptolemais (Acve) and Aradus with Alexander I. Bala, 150-145 B.c., Journal international d’archéologie numismatique, 4 (1901) p. 203, and 3 (1900) p. 148; and coins of Tyre and Aradus with Antiochus VII. Euergetes, 141-129 B.c., ibid. 6 (1903) p. 291, and 3 (1900) p. 148.
254 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
in the language of the Master the roar of breakers coming from the great world afar off. He mentioned the title not without contempt, and forbade His disciples to allow them- selves to be so called: the name contradicted the idea of service in brotherhood.
About twenty years after this St. Paul, on his journeyings through the world, finds himself at Athens. He walks through the streets, and stands meditating before an altar. He is profoundly interested by the inscription 1: “ΤῸ an unknown god.” That line on the stone he interprets as the pagan yearning for the living God, whom he possesses in Christ.
At Ephesus, whither St. Paul soon proceeded, there was another experience, not with an inscription this time, but with papyrus books. Preaching with the Holy Ghost and with power he won over a number of Jews and pagans, and many of them who had dealt in magic brought their magical books and burnt them publicly. There were such quantities of them that St. Luke—perhaps with some pious exaggeration —places their value δὲ 50,000 silver drachmae.? The new discoveries enable us to form a peculiarly vivid conception of the appearance and contents of these magical books. There are in our museums numerous fragments of ancient papyrus books of magic, sometimes of very considerable size, for the publication and elucidation of which we are especially indebted to Carl Wessely, Albrecht Dieterich, and Sir Frederic Kenyon. The most important fragment is no doubt the “ Great ’’ Magical Papyrus in the Bibliothéque Nationale at Paris,’ which was written about 300 A.D., and has been edited by Wessely.4 Though it was not written till some centuries after St. Paul’s adventure, though it is in the form of a codex (instead of the roll which was probably still usual in the time of St. Paul), and though the usurpation of the name of Jesus (among other things) makes it no longer purely pagan or Jewish, yet it will in the main afford us magical texts that
1’"Aydarw θεῷ, Acts xvii. 23. For reasons which I cannot give here I believe firmly in the historicity of this inscription and of St. Paul’s experience with it. ᾿
2 Acts xix. 19.
3 No. 574 of the Supplément grec.
4 Denkschriften der philosophisch-historischen Classe der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Wien, Bd. 36, Wien, 1888, pp. 27-208.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 255
are considerably older than the MS., and we are in a position to construct from it a distinct picture of what ancient magical literature at the time of St. Paul was like. There can, I think, be no doubt-that we must assume a strong strain of Jewish influence in it even then. I choose as a specimen leaf 33 of the Paris book ! containing the end of a pagan recipe, and a long recipe written by a pagan but originally Jewish? (Figures 48 and 49) :—
Recto, Pacan TExT (Figure 48)
τοῦ βυθοῦ. αἱ δὲ δυνάμεις σου ἐν τῇ καρδία τοῦ ‘Ep- Pine Η
μοῦ εἰσίν. τὰ ξύλα σου τὰ ὀστέα τοῦ Mvevews. καί σου 2995 τὰ ἄνθη ἐστὶν ὁ ὀφθαλμὸς τοῦ Ὥρου. τὸ σὸν σπέρμα
τοῦ Πανός ἐστι σπέρμα. ἀγῶνι ζῶσεβ ῥητείνη ὡς καὶ
ἣν θ ’, S 2 ἣι τ > a a ΄ τοὺς θεούς. καὶ ἐπὶ ὑγεία ἐμαυτοῦ καὶ συνοπλίσθη- or -
τι ἐπ᾽ εὐχῆ. καὶ δὸς ἡμῖν δύναμιν ὡς ὁ “Apys καὶ
e 7 a a
ἡ ᾿Αθηνᾶ. ἐγώ εἶμι Ἑρμῆς. λαμβάνω σε σὺν ἀγαθῆ 3000 Τύχη καὶ ἀγαθῶ Δαίμονι καὶ ἐν καλῆ f 4 καὶ ἐν Kady
ἡ ἢ ὃ καὶ ἐπιτευκτικῇ πρὸς πάντα. ταῦτ᾽ εἰπὼν
τὴν μὲν τρυγηθεῖσαν πόαν εἰς καθαρὸν ἕλισσε
ιν “ yer ΠΥ ΄ ε ᾿ς Ἂς -
ὀθόνιον. τῆς δὲ ῥίζης τὸν τόπον ἑπτὰ μὲν πυροῦ
κόκκους τοὺς δὲ ἴσους κριθῆς μέλιτι δεύσαντες 005 ἐνέβαλον καὶ τὴν ἀνασκαφεῖσαν γῆν ἐνχώσας
Ἴ μ ἀπαλλάσσεται"
1 Wessely has re-edited most of this leaf with a translation, Patrologia Orientalis, t. IV., 2, pp. 187-190. I have silently corrected a number of readings from the photograph; and my translation departs a good deal from Wessely’s ideas. The Jewish part of this leaf was explained before Wessely by Albrecht Dieterich. Abraxas Studien zuy Religionsgeschichte des spatern Altertums, Leipzig, 1891, p. 138 ff. He sees in the ‘‘ pure men” of the concluding lines members of a sect of the Essenes resembling the Therapeutae (p. 146). Valuable elucidations were contributed by Ludwig Blau, Das altjiidische Zauberwesen, Jahresbericht der Landes-Rabbinerschule in Budapest fir das Schuljahr 1897-8, Budapest, 1898, p. 112 ff. Κ΄. Preisendanz, who was editing the papyrus afresh, very kindly sent me on 7 June, 1909 a number of improvements in the reading.
2 I am indebted to the kindness of my friend the late Albrecht Dieterich for the photographs of the two sides of the leaf, here reduced to about two- thirds of the original size (Figs. 48 and 49). 3 = ζῶσαι.
“ = dpa. Cf. the ostracon with the charm for binding, below, p. 306. This and the one in the next line are good examples of p-monograms, which are very numerous in the papyri. The so-called monogram of Christ, which had: been in use long before the time of Christ, is also one of them. Cf. my Epistle of Psenosiris, p. 43 (in the German edition, Ein Dokument, p. 23).
5 = ἡμέρᾳ.
,
256 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Recto, JEwIsH Text (Figure 48) “| πρὸς δαιμονιαζομένους Πιβήχεως δόκιμον.
λαβὼν ἔλαιον ὀμφακίζοντα μετὰ βοτάνης
μαστιγίας καὶ λωτομήτρας ἕψει μετὰ σαμψούχου 3010 ἀχρωτίστου λέγων Ιωηλ: Ὠσσαρθιωμι "
Ἐμωρι" Θεωχιψοὶθ" Σιθεμεωχ΄ Σωθη"
Ιωη " Μιμιψωθιωωφ- Φερσωθι AEHIOYO
Twn: Εωχαριφθα" ἔξελθε ἀπὸ τοῦ A? κοι 3.
τὸ δὲ φυλακτήριον ἐπὶ λαμνίω κασσιτερινῶ 3015 γράφε: ἴαηω: Αβραωθιωχ' 6a- Μεσεν-
ψινιαω" Φεωχ’ Ianw: Χαρσοκ' καὶ περίαπτε
τὸν πάσχοντα παντὸς δαίμονος φρικτὸν ὃ φο-
βεῖται. στήσας ἄντικρυς ὅρκιζε. ἔστιν δὲ ὁ ὁρκισμὸς
οὗτος : ὁρκίξω σε κατὰ τοῦ θυ τῶν Ἑβραίων 3020 Ἰησοῦ" Tafa: Ἰαη" Αβραωθ: Ata» Θωθ’ Eve:
EAw: Anw: Eov: IuBacy: ABappas: ἴαβα-
paov: Αβελβελ" Awvas Αβρα: Mapota+ Bpaki-
wv πυριφανῆ" 6 ἐν μέση ἀρούρης καὶ χιόνος
καὶ ὁμίχλης, Τάννητις, καταβάτω σου ὁ dy- 3025 γελος ὁ ἀπαραίτητος καὶ εἰσκρινέτω 4 τὸν
περιπτάμενον δαίμονα τοῦ πλάσματος τούτου,
ὃ ἔπλασεν ὁ Os ἐν τῶ ἁγίω ἑαυτοῦ παραδεί-
σω. ὅτι ἐπεύχομαι ἅγιον θν ἐπὶ Αμμων-
-“ἱψεντανχω. Ad. δρκίζω σε λαβρία" Ἰακουθ" 3030 Αβλαναθαναλβα- Ακραμμ. A®. Αὐὠθ’ 1Ιαθα-
βαθρα: Χαχθαβραθα: Xapwyer+ Αβρω-
wh. σὺ Αβρασιλωθ- Αλληλου: ἵελωσαΐϊ"
Ἰαὴλ." ὁρκίζω σε τὸν ὀπτανθέντα ὃ τῶ
᾽᾿Οσραὴλ 7 ἐν στύλω φωτινῶ καὶ νεφέλη ἧμε- 3035 pw καὶ ῥυσάμενον αὐτοῦ τὸν λόγον ὃ ἔργου
Φαραὼ καὶ ἐπενέγκαντα ἐπὶ Φαραὼ τὴν
1 The word δαιμονιάζω is probably formed on the analogy of σεληνιάζω; it is found in 1. 86 of the same papyrus (Preisendanz) and in Agathangelus, edited by Lagarde 46,, [Abhandlungen der Gottinger Gesellschaft der Wissen- schaften, vol. 35] (as I was informed by Gleye, 2 July, 1914).
2 = δεῖνα.
3 = κοινά, t.e. ‘and the other usual formulae.’ This note is frequent in magical papyri.
4 This must be a technical expression : the daemon, freed by exorcism, and fluttering about, is to be arrested so as not to enter into the man again (cf. Mark ix. 25).
5 = λόγος.
For this supposed ‘‘ Biblical ”’ word, cf. p. 83.
= ᾿Ισραήλ.
Originally of course the formula contained the word λαόν and perhaps ἀπὸ τοῦ épyov. Winsch conjectured ἐκ τοῦ for ἔργου (Preisendanz).
oa @
2995
3000
3005
3010
3015
3020
3030
3035
3040
Fic. 48.—Folio 33 recto of the Great Magical Papyrus, written in Egypt civca 300 A.D. Now in the Bibliothéque Nationale at Paris. (The photo- graph was obtained for me by the late Albrecht Dieterich.)
ope Tita
~ eS ow Watelyre Bi WL FAN ECPI Ion “77 ΤΡ sg
3945 i i Fae ae sf aa νυ- PDP) λγλυ ΟΡ, 3950 } Arrenend Taree ᾿ Se ZS, i gees pipe : ie PN S| 3060 ῬΑ Wr : vive ἘΞ ΤΩ ἌΠΟ | ΣῈ Τὸν : Clee | A Bay Wt? | TRL "ἢ 3065 7] © pKa SO Pyle DI 3070 3075 3080 3085 ‘
Fic. 49.—Folio 33 verso of the Great Magical Papyrus, written in Egypt circa 300 A.D. Now in the Bibliothéque Nationale at Paris. (The photo- graph was obtained for me by the late Albrecht Dieterich.)
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY
ν᾿ δεκάπληγον διὰ τὸ παρακούειν αὐτόν. ὁρκί- cad a , ~ ‘4 a ζω σε, πᾶν πνεῦμα δαιμόνιον, λαλῆσαι ὁποῖ- xa on an ov καὶ ἂν ἧς, ὅτι ὁρκίζω σε κατὰ τῆς σφραγῖ- ἷ- a 3040 δος ἧς ἔθετο Σολομὼν ἐπὶ τὴν γλῶσσαν ᾿ τοῦ Ἰηρεμίου καὶ ἐλάλησεν. καὶ σὺ λάλησον € om ΣΧ am ΄ Qa 922 ὁποῖον ἐὰν ἧς ἐπεουράνιον 5 ἢ ἀέριον
VERSO, JEWISH TEXT (Figure 49)
¥ a ὦ wy «ε , a ἔν εἴτε ἐπίγειον εἴτε ὑπόγειον ἢ καταχθόνιον A 2 a aA a a ἢ ‘EBovcatov ἢ Χερσαῖον ἢ Φαρισαῖον. λάλησον 3045 ὁποῖον ἐὰν ἧς, ὅτι δρκίζω σε θεὸν φωσφό- 3 ae: ἊΝ > ἢ , a pov ἀδάμαστον, τὰ ἐν καρδία πάσης ζωῆς ἐπιστάμενον, τὸν χουοπλάστην ὃ τοῦ γένους τῶν ἀνθρώπων, τὸν ἐξαγαγόντα ἐξ ἀδήλων Ν a DY , ᾿ Ne Fi ν a καὶ πυκνοῦντα τὰ νέφη καὶ ὑετίζοντα τὴν γῆν 4. > a x Α, ΕΙΣ, a 3 3050 καὶ εὐλογοῦντα TOUS καρπους αὑτῆς, Ov εὑ- λογεῖ πᾶσα ἐνουράνιος δυνάμιος ἃ ἀγγέλων ἀρχαγγέλων. ὁρκίζω σε μέγαν by Σαβα- 60, 80 ὃν ὃ ᾿Ιορδάνης ποταμὸς ἀνεχώ- pyoev εἰς τὰ ὀπίσω καὶ ᾿Ερυθρὰ θάλασσα 3055 ἣν ὥδευσεν Εἰσραὴλ καὶ ἔσται 5 ἀνόδευτος" ¢ ε ΄, x , \ ε ᾿ ὅτι ὁρκίζω σε τὸν καταδείξαντα τὰς ἑκατὸν , τεσσεράκοντα γλώσσας καὶ διαμερίσαντα τῶ ἰδίω προστάγματι. ὁρκίζω σε τὸν τῶν αὖ- χενίων γιγάντων ὃ τοῖς πρηστῆρσι κατα- 3060 φλέξαντα, ὃν ὕμνϊ ὃς 7 οὐρανὸς τῶν οὐρανῶν, ὃν ὑμνοῦσι τὰ πτερυγώματα Tod! Χερουβίν. e ΄ ‘ a ” ~ , δρκίζω σε τὸν περιθέντα ὄρη τῇ θαλάσση - 8 2 a Ν 2 La 2A εἶ ε τεῖχος ὃ ἐξ ἄμμου καὶ ἐπιτάξαντα αὐτῇ μὴ ὑπερ- βῆναι καὶ ἐπήκουσεν ἣ ἄβυσσος. καὶ σὺ ἐπά- 3065 κουσον, πᾶν πνεῦμα δαιμόνιον, ὅτι ὁρκίζω σε τὸν συνσίοντα9 τοὺς τέσσαρας ἀνέμους ἀπὸ τῶν ἱερῶν αἰώνων οὐρανοϊδῆ θαλασσο- εἰδῇ νεφελοειδῇ φωσφόρον ἀδάμαστον. ε fy . > a 6 a τ λ , e Η͂ ὁρκίζω τὸν ἐν τῆ καθαρᾶ ‘IepocoAvpw & τὸ
257
1 For this vulgar ἐάν, which occurs again, instead of av, cf. Neue Bibelstudien,
p. 29 ff.; Bible Studies, p, 202 ff.
2 = ἐπουράνιον.
3 χουοπλάστης (χοοπλάστης) is a word, not yet found elsewhere, of Jewish
origin. 4 δύναμις is meant. 5 = ἔστη, cf. LKX Exodus xiv. 27, καὶ ἀπεκατέστη τὸ ὕδωρ.
6 A word has dropped out here; Wessely’s ὄχλον is a good conjecture.
7 ὑμνεῖ ὅ 8 Corrected from τειξος. ® = συνσείοντα.
258 ΠΊΙΟΗΤ FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
" lat , 3070 ἄσβεστον πῦρ διὰ παντὸς αἰῶνος προσπαρά- κειταιΐ 7H ὀνόματι αὐτοῦ τῶ ἁγίω Laew- ‘ βαφρενεμουν, d*, ὃν τρέμει Tévva πυρὸς ν N καὶ φλόγες περιφλογίζουσι καὶ σίδηρος λακᾶ καὶ πᾶν ὄρος ἐκ θεμελίου φοβεῖται. 3075 ὁρκίζω σε, πᾶν πνεῦμα δαιμόνιον, τὸν ἐφο- ρῶντα ἐπὶ γῆς καὶ ποιοῦντα ἔκτρομα ὃ τὰ .(θεμίλια αὐτῆς καὶ ποιήσαντα τὰ πάντα ἐξ ὧν οὐκ ὄντων εἰς τὸ εἶναι. ὁρκίζω δέ σε τὸν παραλαμβάνοντα τὸν ὁρκισμὸν τοῦτον χοίριον ® ; Ν a Ν ε £ a na an 3080 μὴ φαγεῖν Kal ὑποταγήσεταί σοι πᾶν πνεῦμα Ν ὃ ¥ ε a aN wa 7 ε Ey δὲ καὶ δαιμόνιον ὁποῖον ἐὰν ἦν. ὁρκίζων δὲ ὰ 8 2k ay ve oe δὴ > , φίσα a8 ἀπὸ τῶν ἄκρων Kal τῶν ποδῶν ἀφαΐί- ρων τὸ φύσημα ἕως τοῦ προσώπου καὶ εἰσ- , , δ oe ἧς , κριθήσεται. φύλασσε καθαρός" ὃ yap λόγος 3085 ἐστὶν ἑβραϊκὸς καὶ φυλασσόμενος παρὰ κα- θαροῖς ἀνδράσιν :
Recto, PAGAN TEXT
The subject referred to is a root, which is dug up with certain ceremonies, while a magic spell is pronounced, part of which comes on this page. The daemon is being addressed. Note the paratactic style and the frequent use of and.10
“|... . of the depth. But thy powers are in the heart of
Hermes. Thy trees are the bones of Mnevis.. And thy 2995 flowers are the eye of Horus. Thy seed is the seed of Pan. Gird thyself for the strife with rosin
as also 12
1 Preisendanz (Archiv fiir Religionswissenschaft 17, Ὁ. 347 2.) makes the attractive conjecture that προσπαρακάεται was the original reading.
2 = λόγος.
8. ἔκτρομος is not in the lexicons, but it seems to be a synonym of ἔντρομος,
* Acts vii. 32, xvi. 29; Heb. xii.21. (TR)
4 = θεμέλια.
5 = ἐκ τῶν.
® = χοίρειον according to Debrunner (letter, Basel, 25 April, 1913).
7 For ἦν after ἐάν οἵ. Neue Bibelstudien, pp. 29, 31; Bible Studies, Ὁ. 201 f.
® This a is no doubt a dittograph and may be struck out. According to Preisendanz a = ἃ (ἅπαξ).
9 The MS. has αφαιρων, but ἀφαιρῶν would make no sense. ἀπαίρων, however, used as in LXX Psalm Ixxvii. [Ixxviii.] 26, 52 in the sense of ‘' make to go forth,” suits admirably and was probably the original reading.
10 Cf. p. 131 ff. above.
11 The Egyptain Sun-bull.
12 Here, I think, one line or more must have dropped out; even by takingds as a preposition we get no good sense.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 259
the gods. And for my health! <and> be my companion in arms at my prayer.2 And give us power like Ares and Athena. I am#® Hermes. I seize thee in fellowship with 4 good 3000 Tyche and good Daemon, and in a good hour, and on a day good and prosperous for all things.’’ Having said this, : roll > up the gathered herb in a clean linen cloth. But into the place of the root seven wheat- grains, and the like number of barley, they ὅ mixed with honey 3005 and threw. And having filled in the earth that was dug up he ὁ departeth.
Recto, JEwisH TEXT
For those possessed by daemons, an approved charm by Pibechis.? Take oil made from unripe olives, together with the plant mastigia 8 and lotus pith,® and boil it with marjoram 3010 (very colourless), saying: ‘ Jéél,1° Ossarthiomi,
1 These words perhaps should be construed with the preceding. 2 Or “ according to my wish.”
3 Cf. pp. 136-143 above.
4 This σύν is a technical expression in the ritual of magic and cursing. Cf. p. 303, n. 1 below.
5 Note the change of subject.
5.1.6. the digger of the root.
7 A magician, cf. Albrecht Dieterich, Jahrbiicher fiir classische Philologie, 16. Supplementband (1888), p. 756.
8 ?? Οἱ. Albr. Dieterich, Abvaxas, p. 138. (Can “ herb mastic,” a plant resembling marjoram, be meant? Tr.].
9. Lotometra is perhaps the name of a plant, cf. Thesaurus Linguae Graecae, V. col. 473.
10 In these charms we should try to distinguish between meaningless hocus- pocus and words of Semitic (cf. Bibelstudien p. 1 ff.; Bible Studies, p. 321 ff.) or Egyptian origin, etc., which once had and might still have a meaning. In trying to recover this meaning we must not only employ the resources of modern philology but also take into account the ancient popular and guessing etymologies, of which we have a good number of (Semitic) examples in the Onomastica Sacra. Several of the magical words in this text are Biblical and are explained in the Onomastica Sacra. That the explanations in the Onomastica Sacra were in some cases current among the people, is shown by the Heidelberg papyrus amulet containing Semitic names and Greek explanations (cf. Figure 73, facing p.-405 below). (The English reader will find other interesting examples of such ‘‘ words of power ”’ in a paper by W. R. Halliday, ‘‘ Horse-Racing and Magic under the Roman Empire,” Discovery, 3 (April, 1922), pp. 99-102. TR.) :
260 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Emiari, Theéchipsoith, Sithemedch, Sothé, 158, Mimipsdthidoph, Pherséthi AEEIOYO 1δξ, Eéchariphtha: come out of} such an one (and the other usual formulae).”’ But write this phylactery ? upon a little sheet of 3015 tin: “ Jaé6, Abradthidch, Phtha, Mesen- psinias, Phedch, Jaé6, CharsGc,”’ and hang it round the sufferer: it is of every daemon a thing to be trembled at,? which he fears. Standing opposite, adjure him. The adjura- tion is this: “1 adjure thee by the god of the Hebrews 3020 Jésu,* Jaba, Jaé, Abradth, Aia, Thoth, Ele, El6, Aéd, Eu, Jiibaech, Abarmas, Jaba- rau, Abelbel, Léna, Abra, Maroia, Bracién, thou that appearest in fire, thou that art in the midst of earth and snow and vapour,® Tannétis ὃ: let thy angel descend, 3025 the implacable one, and let him draw into captivity the daemon as he flieth around this creature which God formed in his holy paradise.’ For I pray to the holy god, through the might of § Ammén- . ipsentanchd.” Sentence. “1 adjure thee with bold, rash words: Jacuth, 3030 Ablanathanalba, Acramm.’’ Sentence. ‘‘ Adth, Jatha- bathra, Chachthabratha, Chamynchel, Abré- - 6th. Thou art Abrasiléth, Allélu, Jeldsai, Jaél: I adjure thee by him who appeared unto Osrael 9 in the pillar of light and in the cloud by
1 The same formula exactly occurs in Luke iv. 35; with ἐκ instead of ἀπό in Mark i. 25, v. 8, ix. 25. 2 T.e. amulet. :
3 Cf. James ii. 19, and Bibelstudien, p. 42 £.; Bible Studies, p. 288.
4 The name Jesu as part of the formula can hardly be ancient. It was probably inserted by some pagan: no Christian, still less a Jew, would have called Jesus ‘‘ the god of the Hebrews.” It is to be regretted that the passage is still uncritically made use of in William Benjamin Smith’s Der vorchristliche Jesus,? Jena, 1911, p. xxvi. f.
5 Snow and vapour coming from God, LXX Psalm cxlvii. 5 [16], cf. also LXX Job xxxviii. 22, 9.
8 ? Dieterich, Abraxas, p. 138, alters it to τανυσθείς.
7 Cf. Tanchuma, Pikkudé 3: Rabbi Jochanan said: “Ὁ. . Know that all the souls which have been since the first Adam and which shall be till the end of the whole world, were created in the six days of creation. They are all in the garden of Eden ”’ (Ferdinand Weber, Jidische Theologie auf Grund des Talmud und verwandter Schriften,® Leipzig, 1897, Ρ. 225).
8. This ἐπί seems ἐο 6 related to the technical σύν (p. 259, n. 4 above).
® This form also suggests the pagan origin of the editor of the Jewish text.
SOCIAL. AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 261
3035 day,! and who delivered 2 his word 3 from the taskwork 4 of Pharaoh and brought upon Pharaoh the ten plagues > because he heard not.* I adjure thee, every daemonic spirit, say whatsoever thou τί. 7 For I adjure thee by the seal 3040 which Solomon 8 laid upon the tongue of Jeremiah ® and he spake. And say thou whatsoever thou art, in heaven, or of the air,
VERSO, JEWISH TEXT
or on earth, or under the earth or below the ground,!® or an Ebusaean, or a Chersaean, or a Pharisee.!!_ Say 3045 whatsoever thou art, for I adjure thee by God the light- bringer,?? invincible,18 who knoweth what is in the heart of all 116,14. who of the dust 15 hath formed the race of men, who hath brought out of uncertain [places] and maketh thick the clouds!* and causeth it to rain upon the earth 17 3050 and blesseth the fruits thereof 18; who is blessed by every power in heaven of angels,!®
1 See for the facts Exod. xiii. 21. The LXX has pillar of five, not pillar of light.
? A frequent expression in the LXX.
3 Word (λόγον) written by mistake for people (λαόν).
4 LXX Exod. i. 11. 5 LXX Exod. vii. ff. 6 LXX Exod. vii. 4.
7 To obtain complete power over the daemon it is necessary to know his name; hence the question to the daemon in Mark v. 9 = Luke viii. 30.
8 Solomon's seal is well known in magic; see for instance Dieterich, Abvaxas, p. 141 f., Schiirer, Geschichte des juidischen Volkes, 111.8 Ὁ. 303.
® I do not know what this refers to. The tradition is probably connected with LXX Jer. i. 6-10,
10 In spite of the resemblance to Phil. ii. 10, Eph. ii. 2, iii. 10, vi. 12, this is not a quotation from St. Paul. The papyrus and St. Paul are both using familiar Jewish categories.
11 This remarkable trio of daemons obviously comes from LXX Gen. xv. 20, Exod. iii. 8, 17, etc., where we find Xerraio. (who have become Χερσαῖοι, i.e. “land daemons ’’), Φερεζαῖοι (who have become the more intelligible “Pharisees ’), and "JeBovoaio. Χερσαῖος, which also occurs elsewhere as a designation applied to a daemon (see Wessely’s index), has here no doubt the force of an adjective derived from a proper name. Dieterich, Abraxas, p. 139, explains the passage somewhat differently.
12 Cf, LXX Gen. i. 3 and many similar passages.
13 Cf. 3 Macc. vi. 13.
1. LXX Job vii. 20; Psalm cxxxviii. [cxxxix.] 23. An inaccuracy in the translation here was corrected by P. W. Schmiedel (letter, Zirich, 9 March 1909). 16 LXX Gen. ii- 7.
16 LXX Psalm cxxxiv. [cxxxv.] 7. 17 LXX Job xxxviii. 26,
18 LXX Deut. vii. 13. 19 LXX Isaiah vi. 3.
262 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
of archangels. I adjure thee by the great God Sabaoth, through whom the river Jordan returned backward,1—the Red Sea? also, 3055 which Israel journeyed over and it stood ὃ impassable. For I adjure thee by him that revealed the hundred and forty tongues and divided them. by his command.’ I adjure thee by him who with his lightnings the [race 3] of stiff-necked ὅ giants con- 3060 sumed,® to whom the heaven of heavens sings praises,’ to whom Cherubin 8 his wings sing praises. I adjure thee by him who hath set mountains ® about the sea, a wall of sand,!° and hath charged it not to pass over,!! and the deep hearkened. And do thou 3065 hearken, every daemonic spirit, for I adjure thee by him that moveth ™ the four winds since the holy aeons, him the heaven-like, sea- like, cloud-like, the light-bringer, invincible. I adjure thee by him that isin Jerosolymum 15 the pure, to whom the
' LXX Joshua iii. 13 ff.; Psalm cxiii. [cxiv.] 3.
*? LXX Exod. xiv.
3 LXX Exod. xiv. 27.
4 Noah’s generations enumerated in Genesis x. contain the names of 70 peoples; the Jews therefore assumed that there were 70 different languages (Weber,? p. 66). Our papyrus has 2 x 70 languages—a number not mentioned. elsewhere, so far as I know.
5 Cf. LXX Psalm cxxviii. [cxxix.] 4.
8 This is a combination from LXX Gen. vi. 4 ff. and xix. 24 ff. The giants and the people of Sodom and Gomorrah are mentioned together as typical evil-doers in Ecclus. xvi. 7, 3 Macc. ii. 4, and the Book of Jubilees xx. 5. Dieterich, Abraxas, p. 143, explains the passage differently.
7 LXX Psalm xviii. [xix.] 2.
8 The use of Cherubin as a singular may perhaps be regarded as another proof that this Jewish formula was written out by a pagan. Cf. Tersteegen’s plural form die Seraphinen, resukting from a like miscon¢eption of Seraphin as asingular. But Strachan refers me to LXX 2 Sam. xxii. 11 and 2 Chron. iii. 11 [where χερουβίμ is treated as a neuter singular. Cherubin, -m, was formerly used as a singular in English. The New English Dictionary has examples ranging from Wyclif to Dickens, and the plural cherubims is familiarinthe A.V. Τα]
® Mountains (ὄρη) isa corruption of bounds (dpa), cf. LXX Job xxxviii. το, and especially LXX Jer. v. 22. :
10 LXX Jer. v. 22.
11 LXX Job xxxviii. 11; Jer. v. 22.
12 LXX Psalm cxxxiv. [cxxxv.] 7.
13 Cf. LXX Psalm cxxxiv. [cxkxv.] 21. The form of the name of he city again points to a pagan writer.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 263
3070 unquenchable fire! through every aeon is offered,? through his holy name Jaeé- baphrenemun (Sentence), before whom trembleth® the Genna ὅ of fire and flames flame round about 5 and iron bursteth ὃ and every mountain feareth 7 from its founda- tions. 3075 I adjure thee, every daemonic spirit, by him that looketh down on earth and maketh tremble the foundations 8 thereof and hath made all things out of things which are not into being.® But I adjure thee, : thou that takest unto thee this adjuration : the flesh of swine 3080 eat not, and there shall be subject unto thee every spirit and daemon, whatsoever he be. But when thou adjurest, blow,?° sending the breath from above [to the feet] and from the feet to the face,!! and he [the daemon] will be drawn into captivity. Be pure and keep it. For the sentence 3085 is Hebrew and kept by men that are pure.
Good parallels to the Jewish portion of the above text, both 85 a whole and in details, are furnished by the leaden tablet from Hadrumetum # and a magician’s outfit discovered at
1 LXX Lev. vi. 9, 12, 13. The fire is that on the altar of burnt-offering at Jerusalem. As this fire was extinguished for ever in the year 70 A.D., this portion of the papyrus at any rate must have originated before the destruction’ of Jerusalem.
2 Originally (οὗ, p. 258, mn. 1 above) “‘ before whom the unquenchable
_ fire . . . burneth.”
3 LXX Isaiah xiv. 9.
41... Gehenna. On the Jewish conceptions of hell cf. Weber,? p. 393 ff. The word Γαιεννα, from which (through an intermediate form [Ieewa) our word Γεννα is derived, occurs as a transcription in LXX Joshua xviii. 16.
5 LXX Isaiah lxvi. 15 ff., etc.
® The translation is not certain. I assume a form λακάω (= λάσκω), a back- formation from éAd«noa. For the allusion see LXX Jer. vi. 28, Psalm cvi. [cvii.] 16, xlv. [xlvi.] 10.
7 LXX Psalm xvii. [xviii.] 8, etc.; cf. also Bibelstudien, p. 451.; Buble Studies, p. 290 f.
® LXX Psalm ciii. [civ.] 32; cf. xvii. [xviii] 8 and Bibelstudien, Ὁ. 44; Bible Studies, p. 290.
® 2 Macc. vii. 28. 10 For this formula cf. Luke x. 17, 20; 1 Cor. xiv. 32.
41 Cf. LXX Gen. ii. 7 (John xx. 22).
12 These concluding lines again prove that the formula was written out by a pagan magician.
15. Bibelstudien, pp. 21-54; Bible Studies, pp. 269-300.
264 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Pergamum.! Anyone who can read this one leaf without getting bewildered by the hocus-pocus of magic words will admit that through the curious channel of such magical literature a good portion of the religious thought of the Greek Old Testament found its way into the world, and must have already found its way by the time of St. Paul. The men of the great city in Asia Minor in whose hands St. Paul found texts of this kind were, though heathen, not altogether unprepared for Bible things. The flames of the burning papyrus books could not destroy recollections of sacred formulae which retained a locus standi even in the new faith. But, apart from this, the magical books, with their grotesque farrago of Eastern and Western religious formulae, afford us striking illustrations of how the religions were elbowing one another as the great turning-point drew near. They are perhaps the most instructive proofs of the syncretism of the middle and lower classes.
᾿ Jesus handling coins, St. Paul reading the inscription on the Athenian altar, or watching the burning of magical books at Ephesus—are not these detached pictures typical? Is not the New Testament itself offering us a clue in our studies? Is it not telling us that the texts contemporary with’ but not belonging to Primitive Christianity, which have come down to us in the original, must be read with the eyes of the religious man and with the spectacles of the historian of religion? This raises the subject of the present chapter: the bearing of the new texts on social? and religious history. In the
1 Antikes Zaubergerat aus Pergamon, herausgegeben von Richard Wiinsch. Jahrbuch des Kaiserl. Deutschen Archaolog. Instituts, Erganzungsheft 6, Berlin, 1905, p. 35 f.
2 The application of the methods of social history (as attempted in the following pages) seems to me particularly needful and profitable—And it would be a fascinating task one day to compare the historical with the poldtical aspect of such study, for in many works of the critical schools a sort of political attitude towards the inquiry has all unknowingly become a great power, secretly influenced by the thought, ‘‘ What can we make use of to-day?”
3 The comparative study of religion, so it seems to me, has of late led to an exaggeration of the so-called Oriental “influences ’’ (Hermann Gunkel, Zum veligionsgeschichtlichen Verstindnis des Neuen Testaments, Gottingen, 1903). The material must be more sharply discriminated as ‘‘ analogical ” and “‘ genealogical,’ and the genealogical portion is in the main only of indirect importance (this is also the opinion of Gunkel, who assumes that Judaism acted as intermediary). Gunkel, however (p. 6), rightly emphasises
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 265
second chapter we discussed the linguistic, in the third the literary bearing of the new texts on the New Testament, and we were chiefly, of course, concerned with the more formal aspects of interpretation. Now we are proposing an inquiry which involves deeper issues. We seek to understand the substance of the New Testament (and so of Primitive Christianity), and here again, I believe, the new texts: will not desert us.
Some kind of an understanding as to methods of work would certainly be desirable at the outset; but I must resist the temptation to discuss here in its full extent a methodo- logical problem? which has engaged my liveliest interest since the beginning of my studies. I will only remark that in the case of each single observation made I find the questions resolve themselves for me into the alternative? : is it analogy or is it genealogy? That is to say, we have to ask: Are the similarities or points of agreement that we discover between two different religions to be regarded as parallelisms of more or less equal religious experience, due to equality of psychic pitch and equality of outward conditions, or are they depen- dent one on the other, demonstrable borrowings ?
Where it is a case of inward emotions and religious experi- ences and the naive expression of these emotions and
the fact that the New Testament is a Greek book. This is the side of the problem which interests me most. My desire is to continue the work recently begun by Georg Heinrici, Adolf Harnack, H. J. Holtzmann, Otto Pfleiderer, and other theologians, by Hermann Usener, Albrecht Dieterich, Richard Reitzenstein, Paul Wendland, and other classical scholars. To the literary Greek sources, which have been chiefly studied hitherto, I would add the non- literary ones, which are for the most part more congenial with the New Testa- ment. An excellent guide to the material hitherto collected by students of comparative religion is Carl Clemen’s Religionsgeschichtliche Evklirung des Neuen Testaments, Giessen, 1909.
1 Richard M. Meyer, Kriterien der Aneignung (offprint from Neue Jahrbiicher fir das klassische Altertum, etc.), Leipzig, 1906, is very instructive.
2 Cf. Die Christliche Welt, 14 (1900) col. 270. Since then the same alter- native has been often adopted. Friedrich Pfister in his article on “‘ Kultus”’ in Pauly-Wissowa-Kroll’s -Realenzyklopadie (p. 5 of offprint issued in March, 1922) formulates the problem as an alternative between “‘ genealogy or polygenesis.’” On the subject cf. Franz Cumont, The Oriental Religions in Roman Paganism, Chicago, 1911, p. xviii.; Karl Marbe, Zeitschrift f. Psycho- logie, 56 (1910) p. 261 ff.; Refer, Die jiingste (vel.-gesch.) Theologie (no place of publication, 1914], p. 3 f.; G. Heinrici, Die Eigenart des Christentums, a rectorial address, Leipzig, 1911, p. 6.
266 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
experiences in word, symbol, and act, I should always try first to regard the particular fact as “ analogical.” ὦ
Where it is a case of a formula used in worship, a pro-. fessional liturgical usage, or the formulation of some doctrine, I should always try first to regard the particular fact as “ genealogical.”
The apologist, if he ever acknowledges anything, acknow- ledges as a rule only analogy, and prefers to erect walls and fences round his own little precinct.
The amateur in these subjects thinks as a rule only of genealogy. His best instrument is the wooden ruler with which, to his own increasing admiration, he draws straight lines that can be produced to any length. Finding a phantom of the desert among the Bedouins and a slave possessed with a daemon in the lanes of Smyrna, he triumphantly proclaims the phantom as the ancestress of the daemon, and there is nothing hidden from his sagacity after he has persuaded himself that the gold in some prehistoric shrine came from Saba, the marble from Paros, and the cedar-wood from Lebanon.
Most pitiable of all, however, are the mere shifters-on 2 and wipers-out of names. Anything trivial they regard as genuine; where there is a great name, there is something to rub out : the Sermon on the Mount cannot be by Jesus, nor the Second to Corinthians by Paul. By whom then? The Sermon on the Mount by X or Y, or possibly by seventeen anonymous writers, and the Second to Corinthians, if written by anybody, then by Z, yes, by Z! Having thus made everything anonymous, they think they have done a work of scholarship and have disposed of the texts themselves for ever.
Now, supposing there were cogent reasons for doubting St. Paul’s authorship of the confessions in the Second to Corinthians, I should acknowledge these reasons. But would the text itself be then done away with? The text itself, with its thoughts, remains, and remains classic: the dis- appearance of the one word Paul from the first line does not
1 To Georg Heinrici belongs the undoubted merit of having paved the way for the analogical method, in Germany, at a time when such researches met with little sympathy.
2 The term Weiterschieber (here translated “ shifters-on ") was coined by Hermann Oeser, Die Christliche Welt, 5 (1891) col. 780. ᾿
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 267
detract from the intrinsic value of the text. Does a coin- collector throw one of his gold coins on the dust-heap because - it was along with the Persian ones and he finds it to be Lycian, or because he is unable to identify it at all?
What is the actual result of making the synoptic sayings of Jesus anonymous? Merely the proper name Jesus is erased ; the centre of energy, the “I,” the personality behind the sayings, remains.
We will not dispute that the erasers and shifters-on may in their zeal empty an ink-pot over the map of the ancient Mediterranean lands; a great deal is possible in the scholar’s study. But if these poor people want us to do more than sympathise with them in their misfortune—as we certainly do most readily—if they ask us to believe that the blackened provinces of their dirty map have swallowed up all that was counted valuable evidence of the ancient culture of the Mediter- ranean, they deniand the sacrifice of our intellects. We must treat them kindly, and let them go on shifting; the earth is round, and so, across sea and land, they will find their way back to us some day.
Pledged to no inexorable “ method,” but testing each case as it arises; not providing an answer at any cost to every question, but content to leave doubtful what is really obscure; recognising, however, that light is light—the New Testament student will reap a rich harvest from our texts. Let me proceed to give some indication of the sort of thing he is likely to find, and where it may be found.
2. He finds the world as it was in the age of the Caesars, that is the historical background of Primitive Christianity— and first of all the general cultural background.
In sketching the literary development of Primitive Christi-. anity we saw that in the growth of our religion there is reflected from the very beginning the difference between the characteristics of the common people in town and country. To comprehend this difference we must know what the ancient civilisation was like in town and country.
1 The following pages make no claim to even approximate completeness of statement. Asa rule only characteristic examples have been picked out; the amount of material still to be worked up is enormous.
268 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
From literary sources we were fairly well acquainted with ancient city-life, but the ancient village and small country town, being seldom touched upon in literature, were practi- cally inaccessible. Archaeological discovery, especially since the finding of papyri and ostraca, has brought about a resurrection of such places. As students of the New Testa- ment we are most interested in the villages and little country towns of Galilee, and we have at any rate become acquainted with the same kind of places in the neighbour land of Egypt.
Some idea of the abundance and freshness of the materials now at our command to illustrate the civilisation of certain Egyptian villages may be gathered from an examination of Wessely’s 1 valuable collections relating to the villages of Caranis and Socnopaei Nesus. Anyone who has been brought up in the country and has a spark of imagination clinging to him can now without difficulty participate by sympathy in the thousand and one little things that made up the social vortex for the men and women of these places. The same trifles, of daily occurrence among their not very dissimilar neighbours in Galilee at the same epoch, served the Master of parable as symbols of the Eternal.
No less vividly, however, the country towns of Egypt, large and small, arise before us—Arsinoé, Magdola, Oxyrhynchus,? Hermupolis,? and other places.
There must, of course, have been differences between country life in Egypt and in Palestine, owing particularly to differences in the soil and methods of work. The degree of Hellenisation must also have been slighter in Galilee than in Egypt. But the common element must have predominated.
The parallelism extends not only to details of social history,
1 Karanis und Soknopaiu Nesos, Studien zur Geschichte antiker Cultur- und Personenverhaltnisse. Denkschriften der Kaiserl. Akademie der Wissen- schaften in Wien, philos.-hist. Classe, Band 47, Wien, 1902, p. 56 ff.
2 Erich Ziebarth discourses with charm and fascination of these three little towns in his Kulturbilder aus eviechischen Stddten (Vol. 131 of the series called “ Aus Natur und Geisteswelt ’’), Leipzig, 1907, p. 96 ff. A rich collection of material for Arsinoé is given by Carl Wessely, Die Stadt Arsinoé (Krokodilo- polis) in griechischer Zeit, Sitzungsber. der Kais. Akad. d. W. in Wien, philos.- hist. Cl., Bd. 145, Wien, 1902, pp. 1-58.
3 Cf. the life-like description by Paul Viereck, Die Papyrusurkunden von Hermupolis, Ein Stadtbild aus rémischer Zeit. Deutsche Rundschau, 35,
Part 1 (October 1908), pp. 98-117.
ψχ.,
ἐπε κα ΜΉ λει ce aby a |
Fic. 50.—Report of Judicial Proceedings before the Praefect of Egypt, G. Septimius
Vegetus, 85 A.D. Papyrus. Now at Florence. By permission of the R. Accademia dei Lincei. (4 of the size of the original).
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 269
such as the unpopularity of the ‘“‘ publicans,’’} or again the “tribute” of two drachmae 3 levied in Egypt for the Great Great God Suchus in the gospel age,? but also to peculiarities of legal life.
A Florentine papyrus‘ of the year 85 a.D. (Figure 50) supplies a very noteworthy parallel to Mark xv. 15, etc. In the words of the evangelist,®
“And so Pilate, willing to content the people, released Barabbas unto them, and delivered Jesus, when he had scourged Him, to be crucified.”
The papyrus, containing a report of judicial proceedings, quotes these words of the governor of Egypt, G. Septimius Vegetus, before whom the case was tried, to a certain Phibion :—
“ Thou hadst been worthy of scourging* .. but I will give thee to the people.” 7
1 Cf. Wilcken, Griechische Ostraka, I. p. 568 f.
2 Matt. xvii. 24.
5 Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 748, of the year 48 a.p. Cf. Wilcken, Griechische Ostvaka, I. 360. For the expression ‘‘ Great Great (= greatest) God,” imitated from the Egyptian (Wilcken), cf. Moulton, Grammar,? p. 97, and Bruno Mueller, Meyas θεος, a dissertation published at Halle, 1913, pp. 330 and 346f. A Jewish inscription, Fayim, 25 B.c. (Archiv fiir Papyrus- forschung 5, p. 163) has the expression: θεῷ μεγάλῳ μεγάλῳ ὑψίστῷ, “το God the Great Great Highest.” ;
* No. 61594. Supplementi Filologico-Storici ai Monumenti Antichi Papiri Graeco-Egizii pubblicati dalla R. Accademia dei Lincei, volume primo, Papiri Fiorentini .. . per cura di Girolamo Vitelli, Milano, 1906, p. 113 ff., with facsimile (Plate IX.), here reproduced (Figure 50) by kind permission of the R. Accademia dei Lincei. Cf. Ludwig Mitteis, Zeitschrift der Savigny- Stiftung fiir Rechtsgeschichte, 26 (1905), Romanistische Abteilung, p. 485 ff., and Chrestomathie p. 88f., No. 80. For the chronology cf. Wilcken, Archiv, 4, P- 445.
5 ὁ δὲ Πειλᾶτος βουλόμενος ποιῆσαι τὸ ἱκανὸν τῷ ὄχλῳ ἀπέλυσεν αὐτοῖς τὸν Βαραββᾶν καὶ παρέδωκεν τὸν ᾿Ϊησοῦν φραγελλώσας ἵνα σταυρωθῇ.
® A parallel to John xix. 1, cf. also Luke xviii. 33, etc., where, as in the papyrus, the word used is μαστιγόω.
7 ἄξιος μ[ἐ]ν ἧς μαστιγωθῆναι, . . . χαρίζομαι δέ σε τοῖς ὄχλοις. Vitelli called attention to Mark xv. 15. I first learnt of the papyrus in conversation with Wilcken. [W. M. Calder, Classical Review 38 (Feb.-March, 1924), pp. 29, 30, refers to the Ephesian inscription of Phlegethius (civca 441 a.D.), Count of the Domestici and Proconsul of Asia, who reminds the people of Smyrna that they deserve punishment, and goes.on: διὰ δὲ ras ἐκβοήσεις ταύτης τῆς λαμπρᾶς ᾿Εφεοίων μητροπόλεως καὶ ὅτι οὐ δεῖ αὐτῶν τὰς δεήσεις τὸ καθόλου παρακρούεσθαι, ἀπολύομεν ὑμᾶς κτλ. (Grégoire, Recueil No. 1008; Anato- lian Studies presented to Sir W. M. Ramsay, Manchester, 1923, Ὁ. 154 ff.),
270 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Phibion’s offence was that he had “ of his own authority imprisoned a worthy man [his alleged debtor] and also women.’ The Florentine papyrus is thus a beautiful illustration of the parable of the wicked servant (Matt. xviii. 30; cf. also Matt. v. 25 f. || Luke xii. 58 f.) and the system, which it presupposes, of personal execution by imprisonment for debt. Numerous other papyri and inscriptions show that this was in Graeco- Roman Egypt, and elsewhere, a widespread legal custom.? Probably the most interesting example for us is an inscription 3 in the Great Oasis containing an edict of the governor of Egypt, Tib. Julius Alexander, 68 a.D. The technical expression here used has the same ring as in the gospel. “They delivered them into other prisons,’’ says the Roman governor 3; “‘ he cast him into prison,’’ says Jesus.4
Perhaps the most remarkable discovery of this kind in the new texts is a singular parallel to the statement in Luke ii. 3, which has been so much questioned on the strength of mere book-learning, that on the occasion of the enrolment for taxation made by Cyrenius, “‘ all went to enrol themselves, every one to his own city.” > That this was no mere figment of St. Luke or his authority, but that similar things ὃ took place in that age, is proved by an edict ? of G. Vibius Maximus,
‘‘ by reason of the outcries of this illustrious metropolis of the Ephesians, and because their prayers ought not to be at all set aside, we release you... .” As Calder remarks, “ the action of these two Roman officials,” Septimius Vegetus and Phlegethius, ‘in the Greek East at an interval of centuries suggests that Pilate’s procedure was neither fabulous nor capricious.” Tr.]
1 Cf. especially Ludwig Mitteis, Reichsvecht und Volksvecht in den Ostlichen Provinzen des rémischen Kaiserreichs, Leipzig, 1891, p. 444 ff.; also Zeitschrift der Savigny-Stiftung fiir Rechtsgeschichte, 26 (1905), Romanistische Abteilung p. 488, a note on the Reinach Papyrus No. 7; Grundziige, pp. 19 f., 44 f.; Chrestomathie, p. 122 ff.; H. Lewald, Zur Personalexekution im Recht der Papyri, Leipzig, 1910.
2 Dittenberger, Ovientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae, No. 669.5, (cf. below, Fig. 66, facing p. 358).
3 παρέδοσαν καὶ εἰς ἄλλας φυλακάς.
4 ἔβαλεν αὐτὸν εἰς φυλακήν.
5 καὶ ἐπορεύοντο πάντες ἀπογράφεσθαι, ἕκαστος εἰς τὴν ἑαυτοῦ πόλιν. That Luke is here employing departmental language is shown by a comparison with the report in Bevliner Griechische Uvkunden, No. 15 I. 10£. (194 a.D.), where the order ἕκαστος is τὴν ἑαυτοῦ κώμην is issued (also by the ἡγεμών).
* The Egyptian edict does not correspond with the passage in St. Luke in every particular, but the similarity is very great.
7 Greek Papyri in the British Museum, Vol. III., ed. F. G. Kenyon and H, I. Bell, London, 1907, p. 125, No. 90419, with facsimile (Plate 30), here
οΠῸ τοῦ, τῆμος kul die 5 : Ξ oni YT ye Preicans. 20 fa DMT KAIOR τς ox} NOT. τ “eu ως, ΣΙ: > ἈΛΘΤΙ; oe. ἃ : ce a 4 of
ae!
"ὦ ὁ! ok Gatto :
le ima
Ι Ὶ ! | |
Fic. 51.—Edict of the Praefect of Egypt, G. Vibius Maximus, 104 a.D. Papyrus (part ot letter copy-book). Now in the British Museum. By permission of the Museum authorities: |
(¢ of the size of the original.)
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 271
governor of Egypt, 104 a.D. (Figure 51). I am indebted to Ulrich Wilcken ! for the following restoration of the text, to which re-examinations of the original by Grenfell and Hunt have also contributed :—
T[dios Οὐι]βιοῖς Μάξιμος ἔπα]ρχ[ος] , . Αἰγύπτ[ου λέγει 1
0 τῆς κατ᾽ οἰκίαν ἀπογραφῆς ἐϊνεστώ[σης] 3 ἀναγκαῖόν [ἐστιν πᾶσιν τοῖ]ς καθ᾽ ἥντινα] δήποτε αἰτίαν ἐκστᾶσι τῶν ἑαυτῶν] 3 νομῶν προσα[γγέλλε]σθαι ἐπα[νελ-Ἶ θεῖν εἰς τὰ ἑαυ[τῶν ἐ]φέστια, ἵν[α]
25 καὶ τὴν συνήθη [οἰϊκονομίαν τῆ[ς ἀπο- γραφῆς πληρώσωσιν καὶ τῇ προσ[ηκού-Ἶ oy αὐτοῖς γεωργίαι προσκαρτερήσφῳ[σιν.
Gaius Vibius Maximus, Praefect of Egypt, saith: The enrol- ment by household 4 being at hand, it is necessary to notify all who for any cause soever are outside their nomes to return to their domestic hearths, that they may also accomplish the cus- tomary dispensation of enrolment and continue steadfastly in the husbandry that belongeth to them.
With regard to the last two lines Wilcken ® writes to me: “We have several such edicts, requiring the peasants to return and do their work (6.5.6 Geneva Papyrus No. 16). The Praefect here goes beyond his immediate subject when he takes the opportunity to enforce these injunctions once again.”
reproduced by kind permission of the British Museum (Fig. 51). Cf. J. H. Moulton, The Expository Times, Vol. 19, No. 1, October 1907, p. 40 f., and E. Schirer, Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 32 (1907) col. 683 f.—I have already (Ρ. 235 above) referred to the importance of this papyrus in other respects.
1 Letter, Leipzig, 13 Oct. 1907. For the text see now in the first place Wilcken, Chrestomathie, Ῥ. 235 ff., No. 202; also Milligan, Selections, p. 72 ff.
* As read by P. W. Schmiedel (and now by Wilcken).
3 The restoration is not certain. ;
* The reference is to one of the censuses which were taken (according to an important discovery by U. Wilcken, Hermes, 28 [1893] p. 230 ff.) every 14 years in order to fix the poll-tax or other personal dues. Among the papyri there are large numbers of documents relating to these assessments. Sir W. M. Ramsay, Was Christ born at Bethlehem ? London, 1898, attempted to explain the enrolment in the time of Cyrenius by means of these facts (con- tested by E. Schiirer, Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 24 [1899] col. 679 f.). I think it possible that this line of argument may really lead on to something.
5 Letter, Leipzig, 24 Oct. 1907. Cf. also P. M. Meyer, Griech. Papyri . zu Giessen I. 2 (1910), p. 34-
* This and other edicts are cited by the editors Kenyon and Bell, p. 124 f.
272 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
The cultural parallelism between Egypt and the birthplace of Christianity again explains the fact that we are repeatedly able to illustrate from Egyptain papyri details of the life of the people in Palestine which Jesus immortalised in His parables.
Besides the above-mentioned parallel to the parable of. the wicked servant, we have illustrations to the parables of the good Samaritan,! the importunate widow,? and the prodigal son.2 To one familiar with both the gospels and the papyri the general impression says even more plainly than the details that we are dealing with the same kind of people in the two countries.
Of course there are equally notable parallels to gospel details in the written remains found in other Mediterranean lands. The fact is that the threads of connexion between Primitive Christianity and the world are to be sought not in the high regions of culture and power but in the lower levels of the common life of the people, which has been far too much neglected hitherto. When it has once been grasped that the threads cross and re-cross where labourers work for hire in the vineyard, and where the house is swept for the sake of a lost drachma, we shall be ready to receive with something more than indifference a detail like the following, which brings so vividly before our eyes the popular character of the gospel.*
In order to arm His disciples for their dangerous work in the world with the same trust in God that filled His own heart, Jesus exhorts them (Matt. x. 28 ff.) thus :—
“Fear not. . . . Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing ? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear ye not therefore; ye are of more value than many sparrows.”
The evangelist Luke (xii. 6) has recorded this saying somewhat differently :— ‘* Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings? ”
1 Cf. above, p. 134, ἢ. 7. 2 Cf. above, p. 134, n. 7.
* Cf. above, p. 134, ἢ. 7; p. 165, n. 1; and especially p. 187 ff. A pretty parallel to the parable of the barren fig-tree (Luke xiii. 6 ff.) is given by.Hans Windisch, Neue Jahrbiicher, 1910, p. 209, from the Oxyrhynchus Papyri, No. 53 (316 A.D.).
‘ In what follows I avail myself of my article on ‘‘ Der Marktpreis der
- Sperlinge ’’ in Die Christliche Welt, 17 (1903) col. 203 ff.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 273
The difference between these two versions is practically quite unimportant, although the equation 2:5 = 1: 2 does not hold mathematically. On the purchaser’s taking a larger number of birds the proportional price may well have been reduced; as we should say nowadays, they came cheaper by the half-dozen. It is quite possible that Jesus repeated this particularly homely analogical conclusion from the less (the little sparrows) to the greater (the infinitely more valuable human beings) on more than one occasion, with variants, so that both versions might go back to Him. Be that as it may, the saying about the sparrows—apart, of course, from the mighty “ Fear not,’’ which is indivisible—contains a threefold statement if we analyse it as an economic document of the Imperial period :—
(1) Sparrows were a very cheap article sold in the market as food for the poor ;
(2) They were sold in the market either by the pair or in fives, the pair being the smallest, and five the next smallest quantity sold ;
(3) The market price in the time of Jesus was a “‘ farthing " (= about a halfpenny of our money) a pair, or two “farthings ’” (= about a penny of our money) for five.1
The same three deductions, nearly, can be drawn from one of the inscriptions discovered recently. There is a highly important commercial law of the Emperor Diocletian, known as the maximum tariff, the greater part of which has long been known from inscriptions. All kinds of articles of commerce are quoted in this tariff, and to each item is attached the highest price at which it is allowed to be sold. Historians of the Imperial period are not agreed as to the real purpose of this tariff; but the question does not concern us here. The interesting point for us is that a new fragment ? of the tariff which was discovered in Aegira in 1899 gives us the highest
1 Another market price, the price of wheat and barley, which may be of chronological importance, is mentioned in Rev. vi. 6. It would be valuable to get together some day as complete a collection as possible of corn prices during the second half of the first century A.D.
* Published in an Athens journal, Epnuepis Αρχαιολογικη, 1899, Ῥ. 154.
274 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
price for sparrows. From it we learn the following particulars, applying of course to the end of the third century A.D. :—
(x) Of all birds used for food sparrows are the cheapest ; they are cheaper, for instance, than thrushes, beccaficoes, and starlings.
(2) They were usually sold in decades. Ten seems to have been the regular number with all sorts of small animals (cf. our dozen); the tariff, for instance, gives the prices for 10 thrushes, 10 beccaficoes, Io starlings.
(3) According to the tariff 10 sparrows are to be sold for at most 16 ‘ denarii.’’ This does not mean the old silver denarii, but the new copper coins, whose value Theodore Mommsen ! and Salomon Reinach ? agree in estimating at (14 pfennig, 2} centimes) less than an English farthing. The market price of 10 sparrows was fixed at a maximum of threepence-halfpenny (English).
From what Jesus says, the half-decade of sparrows in His day cost about one penny (English); the whole decade would therefore cost about twopence. Taking into account the difference in date—which is itself quite sufficient to explain the difference in price—and the fact that Diocletian is fixing a maximum pricé, we cannot deny that Jesus spoke with correct observation of the conditions of everyday life. This is not a mere game that we have been playing with farthings. The edict of the Emperor Dio¢letian helps us, I think, to understand one of the finest utterances of Jesus in its original significance. Even in small things Jesus is great. The unerring eye for actualities that asserts itself so repeatedly in the gospel parables comes out also in the saying about the sparrows. St. Paul has been accused—but unjustly—of. overreaching himself in the figure (Rom. xi. 17 ff.) of the wild branch grafted on the cultivated olive: The reproach is groundless, because St. Paul is there bent on demonstrating something that is really against nature; but St. Paul, the inhabitant of the city, had not the marvellous simplicity of Jesus, the child of the country, in his attitudé to nature,
1 Hermes, 25 (1890) Ῥ. 17 ff. ? Revue numismatique, 1900, p. 429 ff.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 275
or he would never have written (1 Cor. ix. 9), with expectation of a negative answer, ‘‘ Doth God take care for oxen?” Jesus grew up among country people, who lived with their animals and felt for them: the ox and the ass, as we know from pictures in the catacombs, were early placed beside the manger-cradle of the child Christ, and the popular instinct that borrowed them from Isaiah i. 3, and still speaks to us from those pictures, was right. Jesus was in His true element in the market-place, watching a poor woman counting her coppers to see if she could still take five or ten sparrows home with her. Poor, miserable little creatures, fluttering there, such numbers of them, in the vendors’ cages! A great many can be had for a very small sum, so trifling is their value. And yet each one of them was loved by the Heavenly Father. How much more will God care for man, whose soul is worth more than the whole world !
‘While the papyri from the villages and small towns of Egypt introduce us indirectly to the characteristic civilisation of the synoptic gospels, the rediscovered culture of the cities of Syria, Asia Minor, Greece, and Southern Italy shows us rather the background of St. Paul’s missionary labours.
Even Pompeii, although St. Paul probably never walked its lanes, is extraordinarily instructive. It not only furnishes us with texts; it has, by its peculiar fate, been itself preserved with all the actuality of petrifaction, and we may regard it as a typical town. ‘‘ Such was the actual appearance of a city of Campania at the time when the Emperors Nero, Vespasian, Titus ruled the world of their day.” This remark about Pompeii was made by Friedrich von Duhn,? under whose masterly guidance I was privileged to visit the place, gather-
ing new and lasting impressions; and I would add, speaking
1 Judging from a great number of separate instances that I have observed, I think it would be a fascinating task to demonstrate in detail the far-reaching parallelism in the civilisations of Egypt and Palestine under the early Roman Empire, using on the one hand the papyrietc., and on the other hand the N.T., the Mishna, the Talmuds, etc. Particularly with regard to law there-is much to be shown. See a note by L. Blau, valuable as concerning methods, in Judaica Festschrift zu Hermann Cohens 70. Geburtstag, p. 208.
2 Pompeji, eine hellenistische Stadt in Italien (Aus Natur und Geisteswelt 114), Leipzig, 1906, p. 24. This is an excellent introduction. The large works on Pompeii are easily accessible.
276 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
in terms of the New Testament: Such was the appearance of a small Hellenistic town in the West in the time when St. Paul wrote at Corinth his-letter to the Romans, his heart full of thoughts of the West, which began for him with Italy.? Besides the indescribably valuable general impression, there are plenty of striking details. The Pompeian inscriptions HRISTIAN (?) and Sodoma Gomora® and the Pompeian “ Judgment of Solomon "3 have given rise to a well-known controversy. In the Macellum ὁ at Pompeii we can imagine to ourselves the poor Christians buying their modest pound of meat in the Corinthian Macellum (1 Cor. x. 25), with the same life-like reality with which the Diocletian maximum tariff called up the picture of the Galilean woman purchasing her five sparrows. How full the wall-inscriptions are of popular wit and popular coarseness! What degradation of the higher classes is revealed when the obscene Pompeian bronzes, costly in material and execution, are shown in the Naples Museum! One single example of a contribution to our knowledge of the New Testament from Pompeii may be given here in more detail. ὃ
In the Revelation of St. John (xiii. 18) we read :-—
“Let him that hath understanding, count the number of the beast: for it is the number of a man, and his number is, Six hundred three score and six.’’ (Some ancient authorities read 616 instead of 666.)
Scientific commentators are probably by this time agreed that the name to be “‘counted”’ must be found by “‘gematria,” 1.6. we must look for a name the letters
1 Paul obviously divided his world into two halves: the eastern half stretched ‘‘ from Jerusalem unto Illyricum ” (Rom. xv. 19). What was under- stood by “ Illyricum ’”’ in the Imperial age is shown by Wilhelm Weber, Unter- suchungen zur Geschichte des Kaisers Hadrianus, Leipzig, 1907, p. 55.
? Cf. A. Harnack, Die Mission und Ausbreitung des Christentums in den ersten dvet Jahrhunderten,? 11., Leipzig, 1906, p. 74 (81915, p. 90); The Expan- sion of Christianity in the first three centuries, translated and edited by James Moffatt, II., London, 1905, pp. 243 n. 3, 391 ἢ. 3; and E. Nestle, Zeitschrift fiir die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft, 5 (1904) p. 168, where other possible direct witnesses to Judaism and Christianity in Pompeii are mentioned.
a the literature in Erich Becker, Malta Sotteranea, Strassburg, 1913, Ῥ. 65.
4 1.6.“ shambles,” ‘‘ meat-market.”
5 Cf. Die Christliche Welt 17 (1903) col. 746 f.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 277
of which, taken separately in their ordinary values as numerals and added together, will make up the sum of 666 or 616. Now it has been generally assumed by exegetists hitherto that gematria was a specifically Jewish form of the numerical riddle, and therefore attempts have often been made, especially in recent times, to solve the number 666 or 616 by means of the Hebrew alphabet. As a matter of fact, however, the interchange of numbers for words and words for numbers was not unknown to the ancient Greeks, as even Greek lexicons! tell us. The patristic writers, in so far as they attempt to solve the riddle with the Greek alphabet, show that such numerical puzzles were not entirely foreign to the Greek world. From Pompeii, however, we learn that they were current among the people at the very time in which the New Testament was being written. A. Sogliano? has published. graffiti (wall-scribblings) from Pompeii, 1.6. not later in date than 79 A.D., one example of which is as follows :—
᾿Αμέριμνος ἐμνήσθη “Appovias τῆς Amerimnus thought upon his iSias_x(v)pia(s) ἐπ᾿ ἀγαθῷ ἧς ὃ | lady Harmonia*for good. The ἀριθμὸς pe’ (or αλε τοῦ καλοῦ | number of her honourable name ὀνόματος [cf. James ii. 7]. is 45 (or 1035).
Another example reads :— φιλῶ ἧς ἀριθμὸς hue’. | I love her whose number is 545.
These graffiti, in date not far removed from the Revelation of St. John, certainly suggest new riddles, but they also establish, besides those already pointed out, the following facts :—
(1) They are concerned with names of persons, which names for some reason or other are to be concealed.
(2) The name was concealed by resolving it into a number. In all probability single letters were given their usual values as numerals and then added together.
1 S.v. ἰσόψηφος. H. Dfelehaye], in the Analecta Bollandiana, 27, p. 443, refers to Perdrizet, Revue des études grecques, 17 (1904) pp. 350-360.
2 Isopsepha Pompeiana, Rendiconti della Reale Accademia dei Lincei, 10 (1901) pp. 256-259. An extract is given in the Wochenschrift fiir klassische Philologie, 19 (1902) col. 52. Wilhelm Weber (postcard, Groningen, 27 May, 1912) refers me to E. Rohde, Griech. Roman’, p. 487.
8 This name is probably only bestowed playfully by the writer on his mistress; her real nameis hidden in thenumber. [For the whole sentence cf. LXX Neh. v. 19, xiii. 31. TR]
278 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST ©
(3) The similar numerical riddle in the Revelation would not necessarily seem Semitic, 1.6. foreign, to the men of the Greek-speaking world. Examples of such playing with numbers have been found on inscribed stones ! of the Imperial period at Pergamum, which was one of the cities of the Apocalypse (Rev. ii. 12 ff.). Franz Biicheler? has con- vincingly proved how widespread the habit was at that time, and a passage in Suetonius (Nevo, 39), hitherto obscured by false conjectures, has been cleared up by his brilliant dis- covery that the name “ Nero ᾿᾿ is there resolved numerically into ‘“ matricide.”
(4) In solving the apocalyptic numbers 616 and 666, occurring in the Greek book, it is not only not unfeasible to start from the Greek alphabet, it is in fact the most obvious thing to do.
In any case the graffiti_at Pompeii bring the Book of Mys- teries a little bit nearer to the Hellenistic world—the world in which it originated, but from which the exegetists have often divided it by an all too deep gulf, although in language and coloration it shows clearly the reflection of that world.
A visit to Pompeii and the study of its records are most excellent means of supplementing one’s Eastern impressions, gathered from moderately sized towns of Asia Minor, such as Magnesia on the Maeander, or Priene, and deepened ‘by the magnificent publications4 of the inscriptions and other discoveries. The same is true of Hierapolis® and many smaller towns of Asia.®
1 Cf. Die Inschviften von Pergamon, Nos. 333, 339, 587. The Pompeian graffiti are, however, more valuable, because more popular.
2 Rheinisches Museum fiir Philologie, New Series, 61 (1906) p. 307f. Iowe this reference to Wilhelm Weber.
8 If I may here venture to propose a solution, 616 (= Καῖσαρ θεός, ‘‘ Caesar god ’’) is the older secret number with which the Jews branded the worship of the emperor. 666 is perhaps a Christian adaptation of the Jewish number to bring it into (subordinate) harmony with 888 (= ᾿Ιησοῦς, ‘‘ Jesus”).
4 For Magnesia on the Maeander, which I visited on 15 April, 1906, see Pp. 13, n. 4 above, and Thieme’s book (p. 20, n. 4 above). For Priene, which I saw under the guidance of Theodor Wiegand on 16 April, 1906, cf. p. 13, π. 5 above, and Rouffiac’s book (p. 20, n. 5 above); also Ziebarth, Kulturbilder, p. 50 ff. The early Christian ‘‘ house-church ”’ at Priene is of great interest, cf.
. Priene, p. 480 f. ᾿ 5 Cf. p.14,n.1above. I visited the town on 14 March, rg09. 8 Cf. pp. 13-17, above.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 279
A good deal is also known about the civilisation of the islands in the Imperial age. The islands of the sea between Ephesus and Corinth were not outside the sphere of St. Paul’s missionary labours. There are scholars who, in the 16th chapter of Romans, assume with the utmost calmness whole- sale migrations-of poor Christians from Asia to Rome,! and who make the slave Onesimus mentioned in Philemon run over from Colossae to Rome or Caesarea, as if it were some- thing quite ordinary; and yet these same scholars regard a journey of St. Paul from Ephesus to Crete as wildly im- probable. But the islands were easier to get at than many towns in the interior of Asia Minor: the list of perils en- countered by Paul the traveller in 2 Cor. xi. 23 ff. shows us that travelling by land was fraught with great difficulties for a poor man.? From our authorities we must certainly assume that St. Paul made many more voyages than we are now able to determine in detail. He had suffered shipwreck three times already before the Second Epistle to the Corinthians was despatched’; and the Pastoral Epistles also mention voyages of the apostle and his companions, of which nothing more is known, the principal one being a voyage of St. Paul to Crete. This last reference points at least to the early establishment of Christianity in the islands. Even if it is not yet certain whether the “ angel ’’ inscriptions from Thera
1 The assumption breaks down at once from the fact that Aquila and Priscilla were at Ephesus when the First Epistle to the Corinthians was written (1 Cor. xvi. 19), and that their house was a centre for church meetings. If, as is generally assumed, the Epistle to the Romans was written not very long afterwards, then within that short time Aquila and Priscilla must have not only gone to Rome, but also have got together again at once the church meeting in their house mentioned in Rom. xvi. 5.—To describe the personal names in Rom. xvi. as specifically Roman on the strength of inscriptions found in the city of Rome is about as safe as to describe Wilhelm, Friedrich, Luise as specifically Berlin names because they are found on Berlin tombstones. The ‘‘ Roman ” names referred to are found swarming in inscriptions, papyri, and ostraca all over the Mediterranean world.—Least appropriate of all to a letter to Rome is the passage Rom. xvi. 17-20.
2 The “ perils of rivers, perils of robbers ”’ (2 Cor. xi. 26) have remained the same to our own times, as we were able to convince ourselves in April 1906, riding through the swamps of the Maeander, and next day at Didyma in the house of a Greek who had been shot by robbers immediately before our arrival.
3 2 Cor. xi. 25.
4 Titus 1. 5. ;
5 Cf. Harnack, Die Mission und Ausbreitung des Christentums,? II. Ὁ. 195 f.; The Expansion of Christianity, translated by Moffatt, II. p. 370 f.
280 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
are Christian, the islands would deserve our attention for at least one reason, viz. that. the inscriptions found there furnish a quantity of valuable information bearing on the history of the ‘“‘ New Testament’ vocabulary.? Especially noteworthy are the inscriptions of Delos,’ Thera,* and Cos.®
Immeasurable, next, is the abundance of light, ever in- creasing from year to year, that has been shed upon the great New Testament cities ® of Greece, Asia Minor, and Syria,
1 Cf. the stimulating conjectures of Hans Achelis, Spuren des Urchristentums auf den griéchischen Inseln? Zeitschrift fir die neutestamentliche Wissen- schaft, 1 (1900) p. 87 ff. I saw the dyyedos-inscriptions on 18 May, 1906, in the Thera Museum. Many of them bear a rosette @, the central lines of which look like a cross, but are not a Christian cross (on this rosette see R. Herzog, Koische Forschungen und Funde, p. 90, n. 1). As Friedrich von Duhn also remarked on that occasion, only one, No 952, bears instead of @ a rosette with a p-cross. I am indebted to the kindness of Dr. Hugo Kehrer for a photograph (Fig. 52). But I consider it highly probable that the rosette was given its Christian character subsequently. On 14 May, 1906, in the New Museum at Epidaurus, I saw a Christian rosette just like this on an ancient stone inscribed to Asclepius. Christian symbols are often found on stones of pre-Christian age.—In considering the question of the age of the Christianity of the islands two things must not be forgotten: the older Jewish settlements and the opportunities for intercourse between the islands. There were Jewish congregations in Crete, and how near Thera is to Crete I first learnt from. personal observation: from the heights of Thera we saw in the south, where sky and deep blue sea joined, the snowy peaks of Ida and the other mountains of Crete. The preliminary conditions for a Christian mission from island to island were therefore very favourable——I may add that in the monastery of St. Elias in Thera I saw a number of Biblical and patristic Greek MSS., the existence of which is, I believe, not generally known. Cf. the account (not quite exhaustive) of them given in the Theol. Lit.-Ztg. 33 (1908) col. 4091, by Samuel Brandt, who was travelling with me. There are also patristic MSS. in the Museum at Candia in Crete, as I was told by the director there, Dr. Hatzidakis, I had no time to inspect them, but I obtained the titles afterwards.
2 Cf. the examples in Chapter II. above.
3 Cf. p. 15, ἢ. 1 above.
‘ Cf. p. 14, n. 2 above, and Ziebarth’s sketch, Kulturbilder, Ὁ. 16 ff.
5 Cf. p. 14, n. 3 above.
5 Cf. on the whole subject Sir W. M. Ramsay, Pauline Cities, London, 1907. [The Zeus-Hermes dedication of Sedasa, near Lystra, soon after 250 A.D., dis- covered by Sir W. M. Ramsay’s fellow-traveller, W. M. Calder, throws light on the conduct of the natives of Lycaonia who called Barnabas Jupiter, and Paul Mercury, Acts xiv. 11 ff. The inscription, found at Baliik-laou (Balyklagho), about a day’s ride south of Lystra, records the dedication of a statue of Hermes to Zeus by men with Lycaonian names, thus proving the existence of a local cult of these deities, to which Ovid’s location of the story of Baucis and Philemon (Metamorphoses viii. 620-625) also points. Published by Calder in the Classical Review, 1910, pp. 76 ff., and the Expositor, July 1910, p. 1 ff. He also has an article, ‘‘ New Light on Ovid’s Story of Philemon and Baucis,”
Fic. 52.—‘‘ Angel’’ Inscription from the Island of Thera. Gravestone, Imperial Period. Now in the Thera Museum. From a photograph by Dr. Hugo Kehrer.
αι
Io
Fic. 53.—The Zeus-Hermes dedication from Sedasa (Ahk-Kilisse), near Lystra, soon after 250 A.D. Now in a house-wall at Baliik-laou (Balyklagho),
near Lystra. Photograph of a rubbing kindly supplied by Professor W. M. Calder.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 281
illuminating the mission-field proper of Primitive Christianity. The spaciousness and boldness of their proportions, the strength and grace of their architecture, the equable beauty of their Graeco-Roman works of art (from the marble miracles of masters in sculpture down to the humblest of the terra- cottas and small bronzes), the old places of worship, venerable still in ruins—whoever has seen, and seeing has reanimated, all this in Athens ! and Corinth,?in ever royal Pergamum,? ‘in Smyrna,‘ in the solemn and oppressive gravity of Ephesus,’ and in the silent and but recently desecrated
in Discovery, August 1922, pp. 207-211. Cf. also Classical Review, Feb.- March 1924, Ρ. 29, Π.1. Theinscription (see Fig. 53, photograph of a rubbing, kindly supplied by Professor Calder), on an oblong pillar, about 2 feet high, built into a house-wall, reads: Τούης (? Tovjs) M[a]|xpeivos ὁ] καὶ ᾿Αβάσκαντος καὶ Bdra|ous Βρετασί]δος ᾿Ερμῆν] μέγιστον] κατὰ εὐχὴν] éemoxevdoav|res σὺν ὡρολογήωι ἐκ τῶ[ν]] ἰδίων (ἀνγαλωμ[άτων ἀνέστ[]]σαν Διὶ [Ηλίῳ]. ‘‘ Tues Macrinus, who also is called Abascantus, and Batasis the daughter (son?) of Bretasis, having restored (this) Hermes Most Great according to a vow, together with the sun- dial, at their own private charges, set it up to Zeus the Sun.’’ For ὁ καί cf. Acts xiii. 9 and p. 452, n. 1 below; for Abascantus cf. p. 193, n. 10 above. ἀλωμάτων is probably a mistake of the carver for ἀναλωμάτων, though it occurs in Boeotian inscriptions. Again in May 1926, as announced in Discovery 7 (Aug. 1926), p. 262, Calder and W. H. Buckler found near Lystra a stone altar dedicated to the ‘‘ Hearer of Prayer ’’ (Zeus?) and Hermes. Tr.]
1 19 April to 11 May, 1906.
3212 May, 1906. Corinth, the scene of events in the earliest history of Christianity, is indescribably impressive. With the Acrocorinthus it con- stitutes, merely as natural scenery, an experience of the highest order.
3 For Pergamum cf. p. 13, n. 3 and p. 20above. On Good Friday, 13 April, 1906, I had the advantage of seeing Pergamum under the guidance of Wilhelm Dérpfeld. Actual inspection of the place suggests that ‘ Satan’s throne ”’ (Rev. ii. 13) can only have been the altar of Zeus; no other shrine of the hill-city was visible to such a great distance and could therefore rank so typically as the representative of satanic heathendom.
4 14 April, 1906; 11 and 16 March, Igo9.
5 For Ephesus cf. p. 13, n. 1 above. It well repays the theological visitor. I inspected the Austrian excavations, under Dr. Keil’s guidance, on Easter Sunday, 15 April, 1906, and a second time on 12 March, 1909, with Carl Schmidt (of Berlin) and Wilhelm Weber. Though one cannot see the house inhabited by the mother of Jesus, in spite of the already highly reputed, modern cult of Panagia Kapuli (cf. an article by me in Die Christliche Welt, 20 [1906] col. 873 ff.), yet there are the tragic remains of the temple of Artemis (Acts xix. 27), the well-preserved theatre (Acts xix. 29), where the Anatolian spring sends its blood-red anemones to shine among the tiers of white marble seats, the Stadium in which St. Paul fought with beasts (if 1 Cor. xv. 32 is to be taken literally), the ‘‘ prison of St. Paul,”’ and important remains of early Christian architecture (the best, perhaps, still unexcavated). And above all, one obtains an ineradicable impression of the greatness and distinctiveness of the most important city in the world, after Jerusalem and Antioch, in the early history of Christianity—the city of St. Paul and St. John the Evangelist.
282 ‘LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST us
fairy-world of Miletus-Didyma,! at Laodicea* and Hiera- polis,? at Angora‘ and Konieh,® at Tarsus,* Antioch on the Orontes,’? and at Damascus,’ will have acquired, even if all the details were to escape him, one permanent possession —the recognition of the grandeur of that world of which a Paul had ventured to say that it was passing away. Was this remark of the artisan missionary dictated by the futile envy of one excluded from it? or did it come from the con- sciousness of an inner power superior even to that world? And the quiet little Book containing the simple evidences of that power—does it not seem strangely great when we open. it on the Acrocorinthus or among the ruins of Ephesus ἢ greater than the whole Bibliotheca Christiana of after times with its frequent sins of prolixity ?
Some traditional lines in the picture of the ancient world would have to be altered if we were to try to-day to depict that world after a study of its own records." Most of us, probably, at some time or other, have heard that the world to which the Gospel message came was thoroughly corrupt.
1 For Miletus-Didyma, see p. 13, n. 6 and p. 14, n. 6 above. We visited
these places under the guidance of Theodor Wiegand, 16-18 April, 1906. Some Milesian matter will be found in the Appendices.
2 13 March, 1909. 3 14 March, 1909.
4 2 and 3 March, 1909. 56 6-8 March, 1909.
8. 20 and 21 March, 1909. 7 23 and 24 March, 1909. 8 29 and 30 March, 1909. ® 1 Cor, vii. 31.
10 The best works available to theologians are : Theodor Mommsen, Romische Geschichte, Vol. V.; Ludwig Friedlander, Darstellungen aus dey Sittengeschichte Roms in der Zeit von Augustus bis zum Ausgang dey Antonine, 4 parts, 8th edition, Leipzig, 1910 (in the 7th edition the notes were unaccountably omitted) [Eng. trans. by L. A. Magnus and J. H. Freese, London, 1908-1913; vol. iv., by A. B. Gough, contains the notes and appendices of the 6th edition] ; and especially Paul Wendland, Die hellenistisch-rémische Kultuy in thren Beziehungen zu Judentum und Christentum (Handbuch zum Neuen Testament, I, 2), Tiibingen, 1907,2% 1912. The only thing I miss in this excellent work is a stronger emphasis on the popular elements in the culture of the Imperial age. The background sketched by Wendland is more suitable to that stage of Christianity (2nd cent.) in which it was becoming literary and theological. W. Staerk, Neutestamentliche Zeitgeschichte, 2 small volumes in Géschen’s series, Leipzig, 1907, gives a popular and well-ordered summary of recent research.—Theologians must on no account neglect the investigations of Ludwig Mitteis in the first part of his Reichsrecht und Volksvecht in den Gstlichen Provinzen des vémischen Kaitserreichs, Leipzig, 1891, entitled ‘‘ Die hellenistische (cf. p. vii) Civilisation und ihre Grenzen.” Though written before the publication of most of the papyri and ostraca, this book was epoch-
making in its use of the non-literary texts which were known down to that time. ᾿
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 283
Many writers have in good faith painted the situation in the Roman Imperial period in the darkest colours; and in cases where there was really nothing but light to be seen, people have been only too often inclined to call the virtues of the heathen brilliant vices.
This dark picture of the ancient world is due, I think, to two main facts: it was drawn from the Jiterary records of the age, and it was influenced by the polemical exaggera- tions of zealous Fathers of the Church. St. Paul must not be held responsible for it; in spite of his feeling of superi- ority to this transitory world and its hollow wisdom, and in spite of his knowledge-of the corruption of a great city,! he did not overlook the light places, and he was never a mere ‘advocate abusing his opponent. It was otherwise with the later champions of the faith, when the world had declared war to the knife against it. They had to struggle against the world outside and the world in their own camp, and it is not difficult to understand their passionateness and to pardon their heated exaggerations.
But the Christian historian of to-day ought to be just in his judgments—because he is a Christian, and, if not for that reason, then because he is entered on the roll of the religion that came out victorious in the struggle. At any rate he ought to notice which lines are caricatured. And it ought to be equally clear to him that the merely literary records of an age are insufficient to give him a reliable picture.? As a general rule, literature is a reflex of upper-class opinions. Doubt, denial, satiety, frivolity always proclaim themselves much more loudly in the upper than in the vigorous and unspoiled lower classes. A lower class that begins to doubt and scoff is generally copying the educated classes; it always lags some few dozen years behind the class above it, that amount of time being required for the impurities to filter down. Then, however, purification takes place automat- ically; the giant body is robust and contains its own means of healing. ’
The Roman Imperial period of literature is, as a matter of fact, rich in notes of negation and despair; the luxury of the potentates,, with its refinements in the cultivation of
1 Rom. i. 24 ff. 3 Cf. pp. 3 f., above.
284 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
obscenity and brutality, certainly does give the age a dark look. But even in the literature forces of a different kind are heard and felt. The popular writers on ethics in the narrower sense, to whom Georg Heinrici ! so insistently refers, _ served positively to prepare the way for Christianity; but, not to mention them, what an attractive personality, taken all round, is Plutarch—and there are many other good names besides his that could be mentioned in the cultured and powerful class. And then, when we descend into the great masses and listen to them at their work, in the fields, in the workshop, on the Nile boat and the Roman cornships, in the army and at the money-changer’s table,—he must be blind who cannot see that many were leading useful, hard-working, dependable lives, that family feeling and friendship bound poor people together and strengthened them, that the blessings of an old and comparatively established civilisation were felt in the smallest villages, and, chiefly, that a deeply religious strain went through that entire world.
3. This brings us to that feature of the world contemporary with Primitive Christianity which is for us, of course, the most important, viz. its religious position. The new texts are here extraordinarily productive, for a large proportion of them are of a directly religious nature.2 There are the innumerable epitaphs, in poetry and prose; there are prayers and dedications, temple laws and sacrificial regulations; there are confessions of sin,’ private letters with a religious colouring, horoscopes, amulets, cursing tablets and magical books; there are oracles and thankful accounts of deliverance from dire peril or of miraculous cures at the great shrines. And if anyone doubts the words of these texts—setting aside the assurances of intercession in the papyrus letters as mere phrases, and the reports of cures as simply so much sacerdotal fraud—perhaps figures will appeal to him. Let him calculate the sums of money that were devoted to
1 Chiefly in his various commentaries on the Epistles to the Corinthians, and in his semasiological analysis of the Sermon on the Mount (Vol. III. of his Beitrage, Leipzig, 1905).
? Many examples are made use of in the various chapters of this book.
3 These extremely remarkable texts have now been conveniently collected and criticised by Franz Steinleitner, Die Beicht. Cf. p. 192, n. 3 above.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 285
religious purposes in the Imperial period on the evidence of dedicatory inscriptions and the papyri!—from the monster presentations to great temples immortalised in marble splendour, to the drachmae and obols of the Isis collections for which a receipt was issued to the Egyptian peasant on a miserable potsherd.? 2
Were it possible to collect before us, in all their shades of variety, the original documents attesting the piety of the Gentile world in the age of the New Testament, and could we then with one rapid glance survey them all, we should feel as St. Paul did at Athens. After passing through the streets of that one city he was fain to acknowledge that the men he had seen were “‘ extremely religious.’ ὃ
The impression is deepened when we gaze actually upon some of the great places of worship which were still in high repute in the Hellenistic period of Roman history. We experience over again in all their complexity the feelings of the ancient devotee, so far as they were determined by the prevailing atmosphere of the sacred place itself. It is possible, of course, unconsciously to read something modern into our interpretation of the temple walls and ordered columns rising from the debris. Above all, the imposing solitude which usually surrounds us as we stand beside these ruins to-day may easily mislead us into giving a false touch to the picture we piece together for ourselves. But the great things cannot be sophisticated: sky, and sea, and cliff, gorge and plain, fig-tree and olive grove, and over all the frolic strife of sunlight and shadow—these are eternally the same. And it cannot be altogether wrong to assume that the feelings which come over us to-day 4 on the site of the ancient shrines were experienced also by the pious men of old who discovered and consecrated, settled and tended these places. All the effects come under one of two main heads: either the
1 There is much material in Walter Otto, Priester und Tempel im helleni- stischen Agypten, ein Beitrag zur Kulturgeschichte des Hellenismus, 2 vols., Leipzig, 1905 and 1908; and especially in Bernhard Laum, Stiftungen in der griechischen und romischen Antike, 2 vols., Leipzig, 1914.
2°Cf. p. 105 above.
8 κατὰ πάντα ws δεισιδαιμονεστέρους, Acts xvii. 22. The A.V. “ too super- stitious ” is an incorrect translation, found also in Luther’s Bible.
4 The following is a sketch of my own impressions in April and May, 1906, —in some cases deepened and extended in 1909—0n visiting the places named.
286 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
beauty and loveliness of the sacred place enlarge the heart to solemn devotion, or else the grandeur and the vastness make it sink shuddering before the terrible and the sublime.
There is Olympia, with the sprightly charm of what might almost be a German hill-landscape—a place of joyous festal celebration. There is Epidaurus, the goal of sick pilgrims, in its green forest solitude remote from all the world. And Eleusis, above the silent bay bounded by the cornfields and olive plantations of the plain and by the cliffs of Salamis; —the spirit of this sanctuary is rendered with marvellous feeling in the most deeply religious work of ancient sculpture that I have ever seen, the Eleusinian Triptolemus relief in the Museum at Athens.?
There Corinth lies, above the gleaming beauty of her rock- crowned gulf, not unlike Eleusis, only vaster, severer, more masculine, possessing the oldest temple on Greek soil, and - overhung by the defiant mass of the Acrocorinthus. There in her pride and strength and beauty the Acropolis of Athens sits enthroned above the crowded Polis, bearing sway over the sea and the islands, and calling up feelings of patriotic devotion.
And then the island shrines: the temple of Aphaea in Aegina, on a steep wooded height, with wide expanses of sea visible through the tops of evergreen trees ; lovely Delos in the circle of her humbler sisters; Thera, opening up to us from primeval peaks, still sacred to this day, the beauty of sea and sunshine stretching away into the blue limitless distance. Finally the great seats of worship in Asia Minor: Pergamum, Ephesus, and Miletus-Didyma, Hierapolis.
But nothing can approach the shrine of Delphi in dignity and vastness. The giants of the prime whose hands piled those frowning mighty walls of rock, the Phaedriads,? have here created for the sacred precinct a background of in- describable solemnity; not even the extravagant profusion of costly votive offerings in bronze and marble can have banished that solemnity in ancient times. And, on the high- road, if you let the eye stray downward from the bare rocks
1 [Ernest A. Gardner, A Handbook of Greek Sculpture, London, 1907, pp. 303 f. TrR.]
2 [Steep rocks on one of the peaks of Parnassus, 800 feet above Delphi, 2,000 feet above sea-level. TR.]
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 287
opposite into the valley, the stream that you see there far below is a stream—or rather, sea—of gloomy, silent olive woods: naught save the distant streak of some bay on the Corinthian Gulf, lit up for a moment as it catches a glimpse of the sun, gives to the heroic outlines of this awesome picture a kindlier touch.
The inspection of all these venerable and solemn places, their buildings and their sculptures, increases our knowledge of ancient piety beyond what we know from the inscriptions and papyri. This is chiefly because in those texts—one need only recall the magical texts, for instance—it is the coarser forms of religion, strongly suggestive of ‘‘ heathenism,”’ that come prominently to the front. If we did not know it before, we learn now from this inspection that, even at the time of the great turning-point in religious history, there were various levels of piety. Just as in museums we see the neolithic bowl side by side with the masterpiece of Attic vase- painting, so in the cults of Hellenism we find on the one hand
vestiges of primitive popular religion, surviving in secret corners and at cross-roads under cover of the night—lurking, too, in the letters of a propagandist —and on the other hand temples bathed in the streaming sunlight, and votive gifts which nothing but a high religious culture could have created. And if we could awaken again to life the choirs that sang in those temples and are now for ever silenced, we should probably be still further convinced of the refinement of that culture. The earliest Christians certainly appreciated the mature beauty of the religious art of the world surrounding them, as we know from the comparatively unpolished writer of the Apocalypse. A good deal of the colouring of his visions is obviously derived from the religious art and usage 3 of Hellenistic Asia Minor; but he shared the popular liking for strong effects, and it was certainly the more startling shades that he adopted. ©
1 Cf. the letter of Zoilus, pp. 152 ff. above.
2 Cf. for instance my little essay on ‘‘ White Robes and Palms” in Bibel- studien, Ὁ. 285 ff.; Bible Studies, p. 368 ff. Much Hellenistic material for the background of the various Apocalypses will be found in Albrecht Dieterich, . Nehyia, Beitrdge zur Evklarung der neuentdeckten Petrusapokalypse, Leipzig, 1893; and Georg Heinrici, Der littevarische Charakter dey neutestamentlichen . Schriften, Leipzig, 1908, p. 87 £. :
288᾽ LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
4. Amid the tangle of religions in the Hellenistic world of the Mediterranean—this must at least be hinted in this connexion—certain great lines become clearer and clearer, chiefly as the consequence of the epigraphical (and archaeo- logical) discoveries, but thanks also to the papyri: we see the other religions that competed with Christianity because they were themselves missionary! religions. The great problems suggested merely by the new material already published 2 are by no means all solved yet. The older Egyptian texts, doubtless containing much undiscovered material of importance, have still to be utilised with the full- ness they deserve, and as yet we have no investigations dealing with the Hellenisation and secularisation of the Egyptian divinities.2 What prospects are opened up merely by the Isis inscription from Ios * and the prayer to Isis from Oxyrhyn- chus.2 To Wilhelm Weber, with his wide knowledge of the archaeological material and of the texts, both non-literary and literary, we are here indebted for an important series of pre- paratory studies.* Elsewhere the investigation of the new sources from the point of view of religious history has pro- gressed farther : we can already reconstruct with considerable
1 Here too the letter of Zoilus is typical (pp. 152 ff. above).
Δ The pioneer works of Richard Reitzenstein (especially Poimandyes : Studien zur griechisch-A4gyptischen und frith-christlichen Literatur, Leipzig, 1904; Die hellenistischen Mysterienreligionen,? 1920), and the extensive literature called forth by them, deal chiefly with literary sources.
8 Franz Cumont (Les religions ovientales dans le paganisme romain, Paris, 1906, *1909; English translation, The Oriental Religions in Roman Paganism, Chicago, 1911) gives in the fourth chapter a brief survey and indicates the problems, also with respect to the other Eastern cults; Toutain does the same in the second volume (Paris, 1911) of his work mentioned at p. 290, n. 2 below.
4 P. 139 f. above. Adolf Rusch, De Serapide et Iside in Graecia cultis, a Berlin dissertation, 1906, underestimates its importance as evidence of the worship of Isis.
5 Cf. p. 140, n. 13 above.
5 Cf. his Drei Untersuchungen zur dgyptisch-griechischen Religion, a “" Habili- tations-Schrift,” Heidelberg, 1911; <Aegyptisch-griechische Gotter im Hel- lenismus, an inaugural address, Groningen, 1912; and especially his great “ Book of the Lord Gods" (as I like to call it): Die dgyptisch-griechischen Tervakotten, text and plates (Kénigliche Museen zu Berlin, Mitteilungen aus der Agyptischen Sammlung, vol. 2), Berlin, 1914, which is uncommonly rich in material bearing on the religion of the lower classes. Much has been pub- lished by Otto Weinreich in his Neue Urkunden zur Savapis-Religion, Tubingen, 1919 (and in his earlier work, Antike Heilungswunder, Giessen, 1909).
‘
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 289
certainty the religious map of the world in the Imperial period, at least at some of the main points.
To take the chief instance, Greek Judaism, the mighty forerunner of Christianity as a world-religion, yielded up its hidden inscriptions; papyri and the evidence of literary writers did the rest,—and so Emil Schtirer 1 and Jean Juster ? were able to write their very full sketches of the Jews of the Dispersion.
Franz Cumont’s work on Mithras? is monumental, not only in the sense of being written from the monuments; but there are also smaller investigations, such as Alfred von Domaszewski’s on the religion of the Roman army ὁ or Hugo Hepding’s on Attis,5 which would have been impossible without modern epigraphy.
Finally there remain to be mentioned the important ad- ditions to our knowledge due to the light that has been thrown upon the worship of the sovereign, particularly emperor-worship, in antiquity—a form of cult whose
1 Geschichte des jtidischen Volkes, 111.8 pp. 1-135 [Eng.-trs., Div. II, vol. 2, pp. 219-327]; cf. also Harnack, Die Mission und Ausbreittung des Christentums, I.* pp. 1-16, ®pp. 1-20; Moffatt’s translation, The Expansion of Christianity, 1. pp. 1-18; and Theodore Reinach, article Diaspora, in The Jewish Encyclopedia, IV., New York and London, 1903, p. 559 ff. In the map appended to my St. Paul‘ (not in second edition) I have endeavoured to exhibit graphically the statistics of Jewish settlements outside of Palestine. It should be compared with Cumont’s map of the Mithras cult (see next note but one). :
3. Cf. p. 19, n. 2 above.
8 Textes et Monuments figurés relatifs aux Mystéves de Mithva, 2 vols., Bruxelles, 1899, 1896. Two small epitomes have appeared, entitled Les Mystéves de Mithva,? Bruxelles, 1902, and Die Mysterien des Mithva, Ein Beitrag zur Religionsgeschichte der rémischen Kaiserzeit. Autorisierte deutsche Ubersetzung von Georg Gehrich, Leipzig, 1903, #1911 (containing Cumont’s map of the Mithras cult), English translation by T. J. M'Cormick, London, 1903.—Albrecht Dieterich, Eine Mithvasliturgie erlautert, Leipzig, 1903, contains besides the material relating to the religion of Mithras (on which see Cumont, Revue de l’instruction publique en Belgique, 47, p. 1, and Dieterich’s reply, Archiv fiir Religionswissenschaft, 8, p 501) a number of other investi- gations bearing on our subject. -Dieterich had previously published a survey entitled ‘‘ Die Religion des Mithras "᾿ in the Bonner Jahrbicher [Jahrbiicher des Vereins von Altertumsfreunden im Rheinland], Part 108, p. 26 ff. Cf. also Harnack, Die Mission und Ausbreitung des Christentums, II.? pp. 270 ff., Spp. 334 ff.; Moffatt’s translation, The Expansion of Christianity, 11. pp. 447 ff.; and L. Patterson, Mithraism and Christianity, Cambridge, 1921.
Die Religion des romischen Heeres, Trier, 1895; offprint from the West- deutsche Zeitschrift fir Geschichte und Kunst, 14 (1895). 5 Attis, Seine Mythen und sein Kult, Giessen, 1903.
200 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
importance is becoming more and more obvious in the religious history of the Graeco-Roman period. Comprehensive works have been published by E. Kornemann! and J. Toutain.2 I think I am able to show later on in this chapter ® how, considered in contrast with that of emperor-worship, much of the terminology of the earliest Christian worship acquires once more its original distinctive clearness.
5. One other thing the student of Primitive Christianity owes to the new texts. It is something to have perceived the religious feelings that animated the great world con- temporary with the New Testament, and to have learnt to know its forms of worship, but much greater is the fact that ancient souls, seemingly lost to us for ever, have leapt into life once more.
It has always been characteristic of Christianity from the beginning, that, as it lived in the souls of individuals, so it influenced the individual soul. Christianity is in the very front rank as regards the discovery and culture of individual souls. Its oldest documents are without exception reflexes of souls. What a soul is reflected in the words of Jesus! What souls has He depicted with a few touches in His parables and words of disputation. And St. Paul’s letters are soul- pictures in such high degree that their writer is probably the best-known man of the early Empire: not one of his celebrated contemporaries has left us such frank confessions. But to understand the’ progress of the new faith through the world we must know the spiritual constitution of the men from whom the missionaries came and to whom the message and pastoral care of the missionaries were addressed.
That these were men of the non-literary classes has been so often indicated in these pages from a variety of points of view, that I should have no objection if this thesis were described as a main feature of my book. There is a book which affords us admirable aid in dividing off these classes from the upper class which, being possessed of power, wealth, or education, is the most seen and heard in the literature of the
1 Zuy Geschichte dey antiken Herrscherkulte, Beitrage zur alten Geschichte {Klio], 1, pp. 51-146.
3 Les cultes paiens dans l’empive romain. Premiére partie, tome I. Les
cultes officiels; les cultes romains et gréco-romains, Paris, 1907. 8 Pp. 338-378.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 201
Imperial age and elsewhere. Under the auspices of the Berlin Academy of Sciences three scholars, Elimar Klebs, Hermann Dessau, and Paul von Rohden, presented us with a three-volume work,! Prosopographia Imperii Romani Saec. I. IT, III., uniting in one great alphabetical catalogue 8,644 men and women who are known from literature, inscriptions, etc., in the three centuries from Augustus to Diocletian, which of course mean to us the primitive period of Christi- anity. Turning the pages of these volumes we find among the men of the Imperial age the deified favourite Antinous, but not John the Baptist; Apollonius of Tyana, but not Jesus of Nazareth; the celebrated robber chief Bulla Felix, but not Paul of Tarsus; the historian Flavius Josephus, but not the Evangelist Luke, to say nothing of the vanished souls in the lists of salutations in the letters of St. Paul. This is no mere accident; the editors intentionally neglected “ the endless multitude of plebeians that crowd the pages of ecclesi- astical and legal writers.” ὃ
I will not press the sentence; I will not refer in confu- tation of it to the isolated examples of insignificant persons who of course have found their way into this book of grandees here and there. But one thing I will say: That endless multitude, as it is rightly called, which seems too big to be comprehended historically, and which begins below the upper eight-thousand found worthy to be catalogued in the Berlin Prosopographia, deserves attention because in it Primitive Christianity grew up and expanded. One of the greatest pictures in the Revelation drawn by one of that multitude and consecrated by the tears of those nameless ones shows 8 the “‘ great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stand- ing before the throne, and before the Lamb, . . . who came out of great tribulation, . . . and who shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more.”
1 Berolini, 1897-1898.
2 Klebs in the Praefatio to Vol. I. (p. viii), “sed hominum plebeiorum infinita illa turba qua scripta ecclesiastica et auctorum iuris referta sunt procul semota est.” In exactly the same way the aristocratic historians of the Imperial age are devoid of almost all interest in Christianity in the first stages; and the fact that Jesus and St. Paul are not mentioned by certain contemporary writers is admirably accounted for by social history.
3 Rev. vii. 0-17.
292 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
And now to-day the new texts have brought a wonder to pass. That ancient world of the insignificant and the many who hungered and thirsted, which seemed to be inaccessible save to the dreamy eye of the seer, and hopelessly lost to the scholar, now rises up before us in the persons of innumerable individuals. They sow grains of wheat once more in the furrow blessed by the Nile; they pay their drachmae for tax and impost, duty and rate and collection; they travel by boat, on camels or on donkeys to the capital, to fill the halls of justice with their quarrels and abuse; adventurous youths climb on board the imperial ships bound for Italy; in silent devotion the survivors observe ancestral custom at death and burial: And so it goes on from generation to generation, from the days of the Septuagint to the gospels and the church-meetings of the Pauline mission, on to Diocletian and the baptised Caesars: in the lower stratum there is always the same bustle of so many humble individuals eating, drinking, sowing; tilling, marrying and given in marriage.
But out of the ceaseless rhythm of wholesale existence souls emerge, individual souls, in which the scholar may recognise types of ancient personal life. The unparalleled value of the papyrus letters is this, that they bring before us with all possible truth ancient souls and spiritual conditions in the non-literary classes.
What is it that makes these newly discovered papyrus - letters such splendid evidence of the soul-life of the ancients?
What literature has to show us in the way of souls is a product of art, often of a high form of art, but even then generally only a drawing from the model. That which is literary cannot be completely naive. We cannot be sure whether it is the real face or only a mask of concealment worn by a player when the Emperor Hadrian writes these verses ! before his death :—
“Soul of mine, pretty one, flitting one, Guest and partner of my clay, Whither wilt thou hie away;—
Pallid one, rigid one, naked one— Never to play again, never to play? ”
} Whether they are genuine I do not know: Eduard Norden (letter, 3 September, 1908) sees no reason for doubting their authenticity. They
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 293
And the works of the plastic arts? The marbles and bronzes recovered from the ruins of ancient cities and from the sea-bed around the coasts are certainly not soul-less; but to whom would the athlete of Ephesus in the Theseion at Vienna,! or the youth of Anticythera at Athens,? have ever revealed his soul? These marvellous presentments of the human body so captivate us that we do not think of inquiring about their souls until we have said farewell to them and the bronzes can no longer understand our questioning. Who would venture to make the great eyes of the Egyptian mummy- portraits speak, or attempt to read the personal secrets of even the portrait-busts of the Imperial period? The con- noisseur only ventures on hesitating attempts at interpreta- tion when he is supported by literary tradition.’
And the men who speak to us on the inscribed stones—do they stand quite naturally before us? Are they not in the same publicity as the stone, and are not their words calcu-
are found in the Scriptores Historiae Augustae, Hadrian, 25 (rec. Peter,? p- 27) :- “‘ Animula vagula blandula hospes comesque corporis, quae nunc abibis in loca pallidula rigida nudula nec ut soles dabis iocos !”
For the “ naked soul” cf. for instance St. Paul, 2 Cor. v. 3. [These verses are of acknowledged difficulty to translate. Prior, Pope, Byron, and Christina Rossetti are amongst those who have essayed the task. The version in the text is by Merivale. Deissmann’s rendering runs literally: ‘ Thou restless charming little soul of mine, the body’s guest and comrade, must now away, poor little thing, so pale and so bare, to a land so bleak, and hast for the last time jested!’’ Tr.] A stimulating discussion between Otto Immisch, L. Deubner, Friedrich Reiche, and Ernst Hohl will be found in the Neue Jahrbiicher fiir das klassische Altertum, 1915, pp. 201 ff. 5. 4121.; 413 ff.; 4151. My proposal to connect rigida with loca there received more than one
confirmation.
1 [Guy Dickins, Hellenistic Sculpture, Oxford, 1920, P. 34, and Plate 26. TR.) :
2 [Anticythera is the official modern Greek name for the island of Cerigotto (between Cerigo and Crete), off which the statue was found. ; See Ernest A. Gardner, Six Greek Sculptors’, London, 1925, pp. 244-6, with plate; Guy Dickins, op. cit., pp. 53 ff. TR.] ;
3 E.g. Wilhelm Weber, Untersuchungen zur Geschichte des Καὶ aisers Hadrianus, p. 174: “Α heaviness about the eyes and a reserved and piercing look give even to his (Hadrian’s) face a peculiarly melancholy stamp.”
204 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
lated for publicity? We could indeed make shift to patch together some of their personalities, but we could put no life into them. The imperial physician and imperial murderer G. Stertinius Xenophon of Cos,1 the contemporary of St. Paul, is a case in point. The editor of the inscriptions of Cos has tried to make him live again and has found in him a figure for an historical romance ?;—a figure, certainly, but no soul.
Two generations later a Lycian millionaire, Opramoas of Rhodiapolis, thrusts himself forward with boastful ostentation among the crowd of inscriptions from Asia Minor. On the walls of the heroén destined for the reception of his mortal body we find still to-day nigh upon seventy records which, in order that his name might not perish, he engraved in marble, immortalising his money benefactions and other services, as well as the honours he received from emperors, procurators, and municipal associations. Thanks principally to modern archaeology 8 this man with the full-sounding name has attained his object : Opramoas is to-day, at least in a few scholars’ studies, a sort of celebrity. But where is his soul? So far as it was not identical with his treasure, it is not to be found on all those great marble tablets. And if we were to receive it from the hand of the angel commissioned to demand it of the rich man in the night, it would not be a soul that felt at home with the poor souls of the New Testament.
Even where the inscriptions seem to bear a more personal note, we do not always: find a personal manifestation. In the poetical epitaphs, especially, there is much that is borrowed and plenty of second-hand feeling. It would be rash, for example, to say that Chrysogonus of Cos, with his eighty- three years, was a great drinker merely on the strength of the epigram on his tomb (Figure 54), even supposing he was himself responsible for the epitaph.
1 Cf. p. 253 above.
? Rudolf Herzog, Koische Forschungen und Funde, p. 189 ff.
5 Reisen im stidwestlichen Kleinasien, 11. pp. 76-135; Rudolf Heberdey, Opramoas Inschriften vom Heroon zu Rhodiapolis, Wien, 1897. The inscrip- tions extend from 125 to 152 A.D. Heberdey enumerates 69 of them.
4 The Opramoas inscriptions are, however, of great value to us as religious history; first in illustration of the powerfully sarcastic parable of the rich fool (Luke xii. 16-21) and the other allied types of the “ rich man,” and secondly in contrast with the spirit of Matt. vi. 1-4. For the type cf. also Ernst Meyer, Dev Emporkémmling : ein Beitrag zur antiken Ethologie, a Giessen dissertation, 1913. e
Fic. 54.—Epigram on the Tomb of Chrysogonus of Cos. Marble Altar, Imperial Period. Now built into the wall of a house in Cos. By permission of Rudolf Herzog and the ‘publishing house of Theodor Weicher (Dieterich’sche Verlags-
buchhandlung). Begs
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 295
This feeble epigram,! the metre of which is here imitated in the translation, dates from the Imperial period and runs as follows :—
οὔνομα & <a> Χρυσό- One, Chrysogonus hight, lies yovos Νονυφῶν 2 here, of nymphs an adorer, λάτρις ἐνθάδε κεῖτα[ι] Saying to each passer-by, παντὶ λέγων παρό- “Drink, for thou seest the Sw" 3 πεῖνε, βλέπις end.” τὸ τέλος. 83 years. ἐτῶν ΠῚ τ
The exhortation to drink in anticipation of approaching death is one of the well-known formulae of ancient popular morals ὁ (often, no doubt, of popular wit), and is by no means rare in epitaphs.5 We can therefore draw no certain con- clusion whatever as to the spiritual constitution of Chryso- gonus in particular from his epitaph. We know little about the old man beyond his name and a cult to which he was devoted; his soul has disappeared for ever.
The epitaphs of antiquity as a whole are of this service, that they reflect for us the emotions of a class of men rather than the innermost thoughts of individuals. Stones with long metrical inscriptions almost provoke us, as we seek for something personal behind the ornate forms, to cry sometimes in the words of a medieval inscription from Heraclia on the Black Sea ® :—
1 Discovered and published by Rudolf Herzog, Koische Forschungen und Funde, p. 103 ff., No. 163. The greatly reduced facsimile (Fig. 54) is given here from Plate VI. 2 by kind permission of the discoverer and his publisher.
® Should no doubt be Νυνφῶν.
8 ὃ πάροδος, ‘‘ the passer-by,” ‘‘ traveller’ (cf. 6 σύνοδος, “‘ companion on the road ’’), was hitherto only known in LXX 2 Sam. xii. 4, Ezek. xvi. 15, 25, and Symmachus Jer. xiv. 8; but it must be struck out of the list of ‘‘ Biblical ’’ words. It occurs not exactly rarely in inscriptions (Herzog, p. 104f.); cf. also an inscription from Egypt in E. Breccia, Note epigrafiche e bollettino biblio- grafico, Extrait du Bulletin de la Société Archéol. d’Alexandrie, No. 12 (1910), P. 16, χαίρετε πάροδοι, and Inschriften von Priene, No. 311, where there is no need to conjecture παροδ[ίτα]ις.
4 Cf. Isaiah xxii. 13 in the original text and in the interesting LXX transla- tion; then cf. St. Paul’s use of the passage in « Cor. xv. 32, which is very effective in a popular way.
5 Herzog, p. 105.
* Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum, No. 8748, 13th cent. a.D. :
ἂν off λ]ίθοι κρ[ά]ζωσιν ἐκ [π]αροιμίας,
πέμψον βοήν, [ἄφων]ος, ἄψυχος πέ[τ]ρ[α]. I read [d¢wv]os, after J. H. Moulton, The Expository Times, October 1908, p. 32. There is an allusion to Luke xix. «o,
206 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
“ΤΕ then the stones cry out, as saith the Word, | Send forth a shout, thou voiceless, soulless rock ! ”’
But the stones remain dumb: they have preserved for us no souls.
Souls, however, living souls from the great perished multi- tude, good and bad, beautiful and ugly, joyful and tremulous, © flutter towards us with the papyrus letters ! that have been snatched from the rubbish of villages and little towns in Egypt. Those who, being vilely deceived in their hopes of autograph MSS. of philosophers and poets, cast the letters aside as lumber owned by the obscure, will fetch them out again when they have learnt to appreciate the value of non- literary waiveté. The more obscure the writer, the more naive ‘will be the letter, at least as concerns the thought of future publication. It may be said with some certainty that most of the papyrus letters written by unknown men and women of Egypt at the time when the New Testament was growing and consolidating are in the above sense of the word com- pletely naive and reflect single definite situations in the outer or inner lives of their writers with the greatest sincerity, even if we make some allowances for conventional wording.
This estimate of the papyrus letters is quite in harmony with ancient ideas on the subject, as may be shown by refer- ence to Demetrius,? a theorist on the art of letter-writing, who says very finely that in writing a letter one draws a picture of one’s own soul, and in nothing is the personality better reflected than in a letter.
Interpretative scholarship ought certainly to come first to an understanding about the methods of regarding, explain- ing, and reanimating these ancient self-portraits. We are not yet sufficiently practised in this new art. The best way is to read the texts in conjunction with other scholars, with continuous discussion of the various possibilities of inter-
1 It is a remarkable fact that the 2nd cent. a.p. is especially rich in personal letters allowing of conclusions as to spiritual conditions. Is that accident, or were men then really more sentimental and communicative? This open- ness and sensitiveness of soul was an important factor in the Christian propaganda.
2 Epistolographi Graect, rec. Hercher, p. 13: σχεδὸν γὰρ εἰκόνα ἕκαστος τῆς ἑαυτοῦ ψυχῆς γράφει τὴν ἐπιστολήν. καὶ ἔστι μὲν καὶ ἐξ ἄλλου λόγου παντὸς ἰδεῖν τὸ ἦθος τοῦ γράφοντος, ἐξ οὐδενὸς δὲ οὕτως ὡς ἐπιστολῆς.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 297
pretation. What one regards as mummy-like another will perhaps be able to make live again. At any rate let us read without sentimentally lauding any supposed child of nature to the skies; let us brand as brutal what is brutal, and accord no praise to vulgar narrowness.. Not on any account, how- ever, must we come to the letters with the condescending superiority of the man from town who knows “ the people ” only from kail-yard fiction or from stage-representations, and perhaps from holiday tours in quest of old farmhouse furni- ture; ‘who thinks Hodge stupid, and is hugely amused at his lack of culture. In these texts we are dealing not with curiosities but with human destinies; sometimes only the humorous vexations of everyday life are concerned—and then it is permissible to smile—but often the trouble is very deep and real. We must leave our linguistic red-pencils at home, - for these are not Greek examination papers to be corrected, and we shall do better to ask ourselves whether soldiers and day-labourers of the present day write any better. These texts should be read only by those who have hearts for the common people, who feel at home among fields, vineyards, and dykes, guard-rooms and rowing-thwarts, and who have learnt to read the lines of a hand distorted by toil.
There is Alis, wife of the day-labourer Hilarion, growing anxious as her hour of trial approaches: a half-sentimental, half-brutal letter 1 is all that her husband writes her from the capital, on 17 June in the year I B.C. "
Irene ? is called upon to console a family that has just been plunged into mourning, but the poor empty soul has nothing to give but tears and a few good words dictated to her by custom; and yet we cannot deny her our sympathy.
Or a young Egyptian soldier who has just been saved from peril on the sea by the lord Serapis, lands in Italy and writes to his father ? while the new impressions are fresh upon him. A thankful, hopeful temperament this soldier’s, as he looks forward to the future, nor does he lose his attractiveness after years of hard service‘ The same hearty goodwill comes out in the letter of another soldier.®
Or Sempronius ® worries about his aged mother far away,
1 Cf. p. 134 ff. above. 2 Cf. p. 176 ff. above. 5. Cf. p. 179 ff. above. “Cf. p. 184 ff. above. 5 Cf. p. 197 ff. above. ® Cf. p 192 ff. above.
298 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT. EAST
who ought to be worshipped as if she were a god, but who is at the mercy of her unfeeling younger sons.
Then again there is revealed. to us the soul of a practising propagandist of a cult: Zoilus1 stands undisguised before us, with all his servile fear and calculating thoughts of reward —on terms with the deity and with the great ones of this world, fulfilling with smartness and sanctity the requirements for extending and establishing his cult.
And then Nearchus prattles on to Heliodorus ? about his travels, and we see him in sacred places carving the names of his friends with intercessory prayer.
Or we hear the prodigal Antonis Longus 5 coming to him- self and expressing his contrition in these moving sentences in the first person: ‘‘I walk about in rags, I am naked. I beseech thee, mother, be reconciled to me! I have been chastened. I know that I have sinned.”
And so it goes on, the texts are inexhaustible. The same papyri that we made use of above to make clear the character- istics of the non-literary letter can thus be employed also in solving a greater and still more profitable problem—that of entering into the nature of individual souls among the non-
litérary classes οὗ ancient society. Soul is added to soul, a new soul in every letter, and we even possess whole bundles of connected letters from one and the same family,‘ and are able to see into the relationship between various families of the same social stratum. Every new soul, however, makes clearer to us the “ world ᾿ which was the object of the mission-
1 Cf. p. 152 ff. above, 2 Cf. p. 174 f. above. 3 Cf. p. 187 ff. above.
4. Cf. the 14 letters from the correspondence of the veteran L. Bellenus Gemellus, of the years 94-110 a.D., which were found in a house at Kasr el- Banat (the ancient Euhemeria) in the Fayim, and published in Faytm Towns, Nos. 110-123. The handwriting of the letters written by the man himself shows the advance of age. The letters yield an unusually rich lexical harvest. For the epistolary formula οὖς (ὃν) ἐγὼ ἀγαπῶ ἐν ἀληθείᾳ, “‘ whom I love in truth ” (2 John 1, 3 John 1), there is analogy in the Gemellus letters 11925. (¢. 100 A.D.) and I18,, (110 A.D.), τοὺς φιλοῦντες ἡμᾶς (σὲ) πρὸς ἀλήθιαν, “who love us (thee) according to truth." U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, G6ttingische gel. Anzeigen, 1901, p. 37 ff., made a beginning in the work of turning these letters to scientific account.—There should also be mentioned the correspondence of Heliodorus and others (see p. 236 above), part of which is published in the Amherst Papyri, Nos. 131-135, the rest at Heidelberg still awaiting publication. There are also connected family letters in the Berliner
Griechische Urkunden, etc. The correspondence of Abinnaeus, which next follows in the Christian Imperial period, has been mentioned above, p. 218.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 299
ary labours of St. Paul and: his successors. This world was composed of human souls. The interest of the first missionary generations was directed, not to ancient systems of philosophy and speculative ways of combating them, but to the salvation of souls. It is, however, most highly probable that the souls of men on the coasts of Syria, Asia Minor, and Greece were not essentially different from those of their Egyptian con- temporaries. This is what I meant by saying above that we may take the souls of the Egyptian letter-writers as types of the ancient soul in general. If individual proof be wanted, think of the surprising similarity between the Prodigal Son depicted by Jesus the Galilean and the real soul of the Egyptian Antonis Longus. But chief stress must be laid on the total impression received; anyone coming from the soul- life of the New Testament to the papyri finds himself in no strange world, and whoever comes from the papyri to the New Testament will encounter familiar states and expressions of emotion at every step.
Some day perhaps, when all those men and families of the ancient lower classes have received individual attention and been made to live again, the command will go forth from the citadel of learning that they and the countless others whose names alone are mentioned shall also be enrolled. The personal register of the upper classes, which is a book of con- trast to the New Testament, will then be supplemented by a personal and family register of the humbler classes, a book not of contrast but of contact.!_ And in this book, in which peasants and artisans, men and women, from Egypt jostle
1 A tremendous task no doubt. A specimen is furnished by Franz Paulus’s Greifswald dissertation, Prosopographie dey Beamten des APSINOITHZ NOMOZ in dey Zeit von Augustus bis auf Diokletian, Borna-Leipzig, 1914. None but non-literary persons, belonging to the upper ranges of their class, are there recorded, 1325 of them in all, mostly small officials, such as occur frequently in the N.T. Still more copious: Friedr. Preisigke, Namenbuch, containing -all the Greek, Latin, Egyptian, Hebrew, Arabic and other Semitic and non- Semitic names of persons occurring in Greek documents (papyri, ostraca, inscriptions, mummy tablets, etc.) found in Egypt, with an appendix by Enno Littmann, published by the author at 101 Gaisbergstrasse, Heidelberg, 1922. Most of these names of course do not come into the light of the inquiry concerning souls: they remain names of isolated individuals out of the vast number of the Unknown. But the noteworthy fact is that, thanks especially to the discovery of letters, we are able to bring to life again a not inconsiderable number of individuals and families who may be regarded as typical of the masses in ancient times—those masses that were, to all seeming, lost.
300 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
legionaries from Britain and the frontiers of Germany, in which traders from Syria and the Black Sea encounter with slaves from Ephesus and Corinth—in this book of the For- gotten we shall not search in vain for the Baptist, for Jesus, and for St. Paul.
Souls of the ancients! Before we leave them let me commend their study to all those—I do not wish to blame them—who are so fond of chasing the psyche of ‘“‘ modern ”’ man with the butterfly-net. If we look to the really great events and possibilities of the inward life, those “ ancient ” souls seem to be separated by no such great interval from our own. That is to say, the papyri teach us the continuity of human soul-life in all its main movements. If I may give practical point to the observation, they diminish, when heed is paid to things of the soul, the interval that many people nowadays, exaggerating the value of things intellectual, feel between themselves and the New Testament.
6. When the individual souls of antiquity have been studied so far that a beginning can be made with the personal register of the humbler classes, we shall recognise better than we can at present how greatly Christianity met the needs of those souls. The depth of meaning will become clearer and clearer in that dream-vision 1 of a man of Macedonia, begging the Apostle of the Gentiles, then in Asia, to ‘‘ come over into Macedonia, and help us.” Indeed, the old and the new came to meet each other like two hands stretched out for a friendly clasp.
In this connexion the fact which occupied us in the second chapter appears in a new light, I mean the fact of close rela- tionship between the early Christian missionary language and the popular language of the age. The scholars who isolated ‘‘ New Testament ”’ Greek did not reflect that by so doing they closed the doors of the early Christian mission. Paul would have found no “ open door ’’ 2 if he had not been
1 Acts xvi. 9.
2 This thoroughly popular expression, a favourite with St. Paul (1 Cor. xvi.9; 2 Cor. ii. 12; Col. iv. 3), is very characteristic. Thanks probably to the
English, who know their Bibles so well, it has become a catchword of modern international politics, but not many who use it are conscious of its Pauline
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 301
to the Greeks “a Greek,” 1.6., in our context, if he had not in the Hellenised world spoken to Hellenised men in the Hellenistic popular language.
We can, however, go still further: Paul and the other apostles are, in a much higher degree than has probably ᾿ been supposed, at home also in the world of cultural, especially of religious, ethical, and legal ideas peculiar to their Hellen- istic age, and they are fond of making frequent use of details taken from this world of thought. This is a fact which is not completely separable from the one discussed in Chapter II;
‘at many points philology and social history overlap.1 This is particularly true in the case of technical ideas and liturgical formulae, but also where institutions of the surrounding world exert an influence on the figurative language of religion.
One of the marks of the highly popular style of St. Paul’s missionary methods is that in many passages of his letters we find St. Paul employing a usage particularly familiar and intelligible to popular feeling—I mean the technical phrase- ology and the cadence of the language of magic.
I have tried elsewhere 2 to show that the curious sentence about “the marks of Jesus’? is best understood if read in the light of a magical formula handed down in a Leyden papyrus.4
So too in the case of the directions to the Corinthian church concerning the punishment of the transgressor who had
character. St. Paul perhaps found it current in the world about him.—C. E. Gleye, in the Padagogischer Anzeiger fiir Russland, 1912, No. 3 (offprint, p. 4) suggested, not very convincingly, that the modern catchword should be traced back to Alfred de Musset. Afterwards (Tagliche Rundschau, 11 Oct., 1915) he referred to the 25th edition of Biichmann’s Gefligelte Worte for evidence that the expression was introduced into the language of politics by John Hay, Secretary of State, U.S.A., in 1899. That would be compatible with my conjecture here put forth. [Deissmann nevertheless alters ‘‘ English ” to “‘ Anglo-Saxons.” But the New English Dictionary, s.v. ‘Open door,’ has quotations, beginning with one from a speech by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Michael Hicks-Beach (afterwards Viscount St. Aldwyn, 1837-- 1916) in Jan. 1898, showing that the phrase was used throughout that year especially with reference to Chinese ports. TR.]
1 It is advisable, however, to keep the points of view of philology and social history distinct. At many points philology holds its own completely.
2 Bibelstudien, p. 262 ff.; Bible Studies, p. 346 ff.
3 Gal. vi. 17.
‘ For this formula see also J. de Zwaan, The Journal of Theological Studies, April 1905, p. 418.
302 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
committed sin with his step-mother,! the full meaning does not come out until the passage is read in connexion with the ancient custom of execration, i.e. devoting a person to the gods of the lower world. A person who wished to injure an enemy or to punish an evil-doer consecrated him by incantation and tablet to the powers of darkness below, and the tablet reached its address by being confided to the earth, generally to a grave.2 A regular usage was established in the language of these execrations,—a usage common to antiquity. The only difference between Jewish and pagan execrations probably lay in the fact that Satan took the place of the gods of the lower world. In form, however, there must have been great similarities.2 This is seen in the words of St. Paul to the Corinthians :-—
“* Gather together in the name of the Lord Jesus, ye and my spirit, and in fellowship with the power of our Lord Jesus deliver such a one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.” 4
Two technical expressions are here adopted from the ritual of cursing. The phrase “deliver unto Satan that... .,” recurring in τα Tim. i. 20, corresponds to the formula in ‘the London Magical Papyrus 4654 ¢.:—
““Daemon of the dead, . . . I deliver unto thee (such a man), in order that... ,’’5
and even the unobtrusive little word σύν, “‘ with,” “ in fellow- ship with,” is technical in just such contexts as this: we find it not only in the Paris Magical Papyrus,® but also
1 1 Cor. v. 4. 5.
2 Cf. Antike Fluchtafeln ausgewahlt und erkld4rt von Richard Wiinsch (Lietzmann’s Kleine Texte, No. 20), Bonn, 1907.
3 Cf. pp. 95, 96 above, the remarks on ἀναθεματίζω, “1 curse.”
§ 1 Cor. v. 4,5: ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι τοῦ κυρίου ᾿Ιησοῦ συναχθέντων ὑμῶν καὶ τοῦ ἐμοῦ πνεύματος, σὺν τῇ δυνάμει τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν ᾿Ϊησοῦ παραδοῦναι τὸν τοιοῦτον τῷ Σατανᾷ εἰς ὄλεθρον τῆς σαρκός, ἵνα τὸ πνεῦμα σωθῇ ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τοῦ κυῤίου ᾿Ιησοῦ.
5 Greek Papyri in the British Museum, ed. Kenyon (Vol. I.) p. 75, νεκυδαίμων,
. παραδίδωμί σοι τὸν S(civa), ὅπως... . The papyrus was written in the 4th cent. a.D., but its formulae are ancient. The present formula, addressed to a daemon of the dead, is neither Jewish nor Christian.
® Cf. p. 259 above, line 2999.
N
N
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 303
on a much older Attic cursing tablet of lead (3rd. cent. B.C.) 2 :— :
“T will bind her . . . in fellowship with Hecate, who is below the earth, and the Erinyes.”
All this proves therefore that the apostle advises the Corinthian church to perform a solemn act of execration. And in the concluding lines of x Corinthians, which St. Paul wrote with his own hand,? there is a reminiscence of the cadence of ancient curses imitated from the language of | legislation :— “ΤΕ any man loveth not the Lord, let him be anathema.”
With this compare the epitaph from Halicarnassus already cited above ὃ :—
“But if anyone shall attempt to take away a stone... let him be accursed.”
1 Corpus Inscriptionum Atticarum, Appendix (= Inscriptiones Graecae,
Vol. III. Pars 11.), No. 108, δήσω (cf. the following pages) ἐγὼ κείνην . σύν θ᾽ ‘Exdr(n)e χθονίαι καὶ ᾿Ερινύσιν. Considering the rarity of the
preposition σύν (cf. Tycho Mommsen, Bevirdge zu der Lehre von den grie- chischen Praépositionen, 3 parts, Frankfurt a. M., 1886, 1887; at p. 107 σύν is even described as an aristocratic word) this parallel is not without import- ance. The same σύν occurs also in a metrical oracle from Asia Minor, in ‘Heinevetter’s Wiirfel- und Buchstabenorakel, p. 6: σὺν Ζηνὶ (μεγίστῳ) (τ)ε(ύ)ξῃ ἐ(φ᾽ ἣν) ὁρμᾶς mpaéw.—We may make room here for ἃ remarkable parallel to Phil. i. 23, “‘to depart, and to be in fellowship with (σύν) Christ.’ As to the formula “ with Christ ’’ (σὺν Χριστῷ) I have tried to show (Die neutestamentliche Formel “in Christo Jesu,’ Marburg, 1892, p. 126) that it nearly always means the fellow- ship of the faithful with Christ after their death or after His coming. Thus we read in a vulgar grafito from Alexandria (Imperial period ?) these words addressed to a deceased person, εὔχομαι κἀγὼ ἐν τάχυ σὺν σοὶ εἶναι, “1 would that I were soon in fellowship with thee ’’ (Sitzungsber. der Kgl. Preuss. Akademie der Wissensch. zu Berlin, 1902, p. 1098); U. von Wilamowitz- Moellendorff there points out the striking fact'that the gvaffito already expresses the hope [not current even in the New Testament] of meeting again after death which is current among us. It seems that we have here an inscription (or formula?) that had previously been regarded as ‘ Christian” (see Victor Schultze, Die Katakomben, Leipzig, 1882, p. 281). The matter needs looking into. Hermann Diels, writing from Berlin W., 22 July, 1908, tells me that the (certainly rare) mention of meeting again in ancient epitaphs has its exact parallel in the ancient mysteries: the gold plates of the Orphics (Vorsokvatiker,? p. 480, No. 17 ff.) have no other object than to guarantee this certainty. The new thing about the graffito is its proof that the ideas of the mystics had penetrated among the People.
2 1 Cor. xvi. 22, ef τις οὐ φιλεῖ τὸν κύριον, ἤτω ἀνάθεμα. Similar formulae, Gal. i. 8, 9.
3 Page 96, n. 7.
304 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Akin to this is the parallelism between St. Paul’s assevera- tion 1 :---
“1 call God for a witness upon my soul.”
and the formula of an oath taken under Augustus and recorded in an inscription from Galatia,? in which the taker of the oath says, in case of breach of the oath :—
“I pronounce a curse against myself, my body, soul, goods, children, etc.’’ 3
The clearest example of the use of technical expressions taken from magic is perhaps the phrase ‘‘ bond of the tongue.’ In the story of the healing of the deaf and dumb man St. Mark
(vii. 35) says :— “And straightway his ears were opened, and the bond of his tongue was loosed.”
Most commentators, I think, have lightly pronounced “ bond of his tongue” to be a “ figurative’’ expression, without realising the technical peculiarity. and therewith the point of the “ figure.’”” But running throughout all antiquity we find the idea that a man can be “‘ bound ”’ or “ fettered’”’ by daemonic influences. It occurs in Greek, Syrian, Hebrew, Mandaean, and Indian magic spells.5 In Greek we even have a detailed magical prescription for ‘‘ binding’: a man,® besides large numbers of inscriptions dealing with the matter. One of the oldest of these is the following, a leaden tablet from Attica of the first half of the 4th cent. B.c. (Fig. 55), which I give here as read by Adolf Wilhelm 7 : —
1 2 Cor. i. 23, ἐγὼ δὲ μάρτυρα τὸν θεὸν ἐπικαλοῦμαι ἐπὶ τὴν ἐμὴν ψυχήν. ‘* Upon my soul” or ‘‘ against my soul ” in case I say what is untrue.
2 Dittenberger, Orientis ἀγαθοὶ Inscriptiones Selectae, No. 5328, ἐπαρῶμαι αὐτός τε κατ᾽ ἐμοῦ καὶ olwpalros τοῦ ἐμαυτοῦ Kai ψυχῆς καὶ βίου κα[ὶ τέϊκνων, etc,
3 At the same time a fine analogy to Luther’s ‘‘ Leib, Gut, Ehr, Kind und Weib,” which is influenced by Luke xviii. 29 [‘‘ And though they take our life, Goods, honour, children, wife, Yet is their profitsmall . . .” in Carlyle’s version of ‘‘ Ein’ feste Burg.” Cf. p.143,n.1above. ΤῈ]
4 ὃ δεσμὸς τῆς γλώσσης. For what follows cf. Die Christliche Welt, 17 (1903) col. 554 ff. ‘
5 Cf. Mark Lidzbarski, Ephemeris fi semitische Epigraphik, 1, Ὁ. 31.
® Details in the Corpus Inscriptionum Alticarum, Appendix, p. xxx (by R. Wiinsch).
7 Jahreshefte des Osterreichischen Archaologischen Institutes in Wien, 7 (1904) p. 120f, The facsimile there (p. 121) is reproduced here (Fig. 55) by kind consent of the Austrian Archaeological Institute.
"92 }217250 [eo1Sojoseyory ULIJSNY 9} 10 uorssturzed Ag : ‘o"a *}UI90 τῆν ayy 10 Jey 151 “ΒΌΤ1Ψ Wor 291482 uapeay ΞΙΠΡΙΠΕ .» 10} WIeYQ—SS “Oly
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 305
Θεοί. ᾿Αγαθὴ Τύχη.ἷ Καταδῶ καὶ οὐκ ἀναλύσω ᾿Αντικλέα ᾿Αντιφάνος καὶ ᾿Αντιφάνην Πατροκλέος καὶ Φιλοκλέα καὶ Κλεοχάρην καὶ Φιλοκλέα καὶ Σμικρωνίδην καὶ Τιμάνθην καὶ Τιμάνθην. an μ΄: ε na Καταδῶ τούτος 5 ἅπαντας πρὸς τὸν “Ἑρμῆν τὸν [τὸν] χθόνιον καὶ τὸν δόλιον καὶ τὸν Γιὰ Σ Ν Ἂς > i ‘ 3 2 , 5 κάτοχον καὶ τὸν ἐριούνιον καὶ οὐκ ἀναλύσω.
“Gods! Good Tyche! I bind down and will not loose Anticles, the son of Antiphanes, and Antiphanes the son of Patrocles, and Philocles, and Cleochares, and Philocles, and Smicronides, and Timanthes, and Timanthes. I bind these all down to Hermes, who is beneath the earth and crafty and fast-holding and luck- bringing, and I will not loose them.”
Many other Attic binding-tablets have been published by Richard Wiinsch,* but we also possess examples from other localities and of later date.
The cases are particularly common in which a man’s tongue is specially to be “ bound.’ There are no less than thirty of Wiinsch’s Attic tablets which bind or curse the tongue. And in the Louvre at Paris ὁ there is this much later Mandaean inscription on a magician’s dish :—
‘*Bound and fast held be the mouth and. fast held the tongue of curses, of vows, and of invocations of the gods. . . . Bound be the tongue in its mouth, fast held be its lips, shaken, fettered, and banned the teeth, and’ stopped the ears of curses and invocations.”
A binding-charm of essentially similar nature is found on an ostracon of the later Empire from Ashmunén in Egypt, in which pagan and Jewish elements are mixed (Fig. 56). It was formerly in the possession of Mr. F. Hilton Price (1842-1909), of London, and was first published (as a Christian
1 Samuel Brandt, in a letter to me dated Heidelberg, 22 September, 1908, _proposes to write ἀγαθῇ τύχῃ. This is well worth noting.
2 = τούτους.
8 Corpus Inscriptionum Atticarum, Appendix; cf. also A. Wilhelm, loc. cit. p. 105 ff., and R. Miinsterberg, bid. p. 145 ff.; and for “ binding ” see further W. Kohler, Archiv f. Religionswissenschaft, 8, p. 236 ff.
4 Ephemeris fir semitische Epigvaphik, τ, p. 100. The date cannot be ascer-
tained exactly.
306 text) by F. E. Brightman.}
LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
A similar charm was pointed out
by Wilcken? in the London Papyrus? No. 12195 4, and there are other examples in allied texts of magical prescriptions
against anger.
The text of the ostracon (not yet fully established) is as
follows :—
Κρόνος, ὃ κατέχων 4 τὸν θυμὸν “ n 3. , ΓΝ N ὅλων τῶν ἀνθρώπων, κάτεχε TOV θυμὸν Ὧρι, τὸν © ἔτεκεν 5 Mapia®, xe? λαλήσεν 8 ᾿Ατρῶί 1], τῶ δ ἔτεκεν Ταήσης.
» 27 a8 μὴ ἐάσης αὑτὸν
[- . . ἐξ]ορκίζω κατὰ τοῦ δακτύ-"
λου τοῦ θεοῦ 9, εἵνα 19 μὴ ἀναχά- νη αὐτῶ, ὅτι ΚΚρινουπελι 11 xe? 10 Κρόνω ὑπόκιτε.}22 μὴ ἐάσης 3. " λ rd 8 3A 4 αὐτὸν λαλήσεν ὃ αὐτῶ μήτε
’ 13 , ς / γύκταν °° μήτε ἡμέραν
Cronos, thou who restrainest the wrath of all men, restrain the wrath of Hor, whom Mary bore®, and suffer him not to speak with Hatros(?), whom Taisis bore. I adjure... by the finger of god 9 that he open not his mouth to him, because he is subject to Crinupelis (9) 1 and Cronos. Suffer him not to speak with him, neither for a night nor a day, nor for one
| hour.
μήτε μίαν £ 14,
1 In W. E. Crum’s Coptic Ostvaca, No. 522, p. 4 {. (and p. 83 of the litho- graphed text); cf. U. Wilcken, Archiv fir Papyrusforschung, 2, p. 173, and E. Preuschen, Byzantinische Zeitschrift, 15 (1906) p. 642. Iam indebted to the kindness of W. E. Crum for the photograph which is here (Fig. 56) given in slightly reduced facsimile.
2 Archiv, 2, p. 173.
8 Published by Wessely, but now accessible in Greek Papyri in the British Museum (Vol. I.) p. 114.
4 κατέχω in magical texts often has the sense of “1 cripple,” and is com- pletely synonymous with the “I bind” which is elsewhere used. Cf. θυμοκάτοχον, P. 93, n. 5 above. ᾿
5 Article for relative pronoun.
* The addition of the mother’s name is regular in magical texts, cf. Bibel- studien, p. 37; Bible Studies, p. 283; L. Blau, Das altjiidische Zauberwesen, p. 85; Wilcken, Archiv, 1, p. 423f.; W. R. Halliday, Discovery 3 (April, 1922) p. ΤΟΙ. The occurrence of the name Mary once more (cf. p. 121 f. above) is interesting.
7 = καί. 8 = λαλήσειν.
® The “ finger of God ” is an old Jewish expression, cf. LXX Exod. viii. 19, xxxi. 18; Deut. ix.1o. In Luke xi. 20 we have “ the finger of God” in con- nexion with exorcism. Ample material will be found in Immanuel Léw, Die Finger in Litteratuy und Folklore der Juden, Gedenkbuch zur Erinnerung an David Kaufmann, Breslau, 1900, p. 65 ff.
10 = ἕνα. ;
11 I was unable to explain this name and conjectured a secret name for the
god Ammon. Preisendanz, Berliner Philologische Wochenschrift, 1913, col. [For continuation of notes see next page.
Fic. 56.—Charm for “ Binding.’’ Ostra- con from Ashmunén, late Imperial Period. Formerly in the possession of the late F. Hilton Price, London. Facsimile kindly obtained by W. E. Crum.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 307
From these and many other texts we see what the ancients thought of as the result of binding the tongue, viz. inability to speak. The man whose tongue was bound was intended to become thereby dumb, so we may conclude conversely that the tongue of a dumb person was often considered in ancient popular belief to have been “‘ bound’ by some daemon. This view fits in with the wider complex of widespread ancient beliefs that certain diseases and morbid conditions were caused in general by daemonic possession. Jesus Himself says (Luke xiii. 16) that Satan had ‘“‘ bound ”’ a daughter of Abraham eighteen years. He means the crooked woman previously mentioned in the context, ‘‘ which had a spirit of infirmity,’ and whose ‘‘ bond ’’ was loosed on the Sabbath.
‘It seems probable, therefore, that St. Mark’s “ bond of his tongue ” is also a technical expression. . The writer will not merely say that a dumb man was made to speak—he will add further that daemonic fetters were broken, a work of Satan undone. It is one of those thoroughly popular touches which helped Christianity to make its way in the world !.
The formulae usual in ancient accounts of healing, of which we know plenty! from inscriptions at Epidaurus and other places where cures were wrought, of course cannot have been unknown to the apostles. As St. John’s story of the healing of the man born blind finds a parallel in a Greek inscription from Rome,? reporting the cure of a blind man, and as St. Matthew describes St. Peter’s peril on the sea in the style of a popular narrative of rescue,’ so also St. Paul clothes one of his most remarkable confessions in the style of the ancient texts relating to healing. Speaking of his severe bodily affliction, the “ thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me,” he confesses * :—
“ Concerning this thing I besought the Lord thrice,”
1 As an introduction to the psychology of the cult of Asclepius cf. Joh. Ilberg’s excellent address, ‘‘ Asklepios,’’ Neue Jahrbiicher fiir das klassische Altertum, 1901, p. 297 ff. . :
2 Cf. p. 135 above. 8. Cf. pp. 179, 180, ἢ. 8 above.
4 2 Cor. xii. 8, ὑπὲρ τούτου τρὶς τὸν κύριον παρεκάλεσα. Ὁ
Continuation of notes to page 306 :— 1597 proposes convincingly to regard the word as a scribal error for Kpovou πεδι = Κρόνου παιδί, “ the son of Cronos.” Nikos A. Bees (Béys) gives a different conjecture in his Byzantinisch-Neugriechische Jahrbiicher 1 (1920), p. 157.
18 --- ὑπόκειται. 13 Vulgar for νύκτα. 14 = ὥραν, cf. p. 255 above, 1. 3000.
308 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
just as M. Julius Apellas, a man of Asia Minor in the Imperial age, narrating on a marble stele how he was cured at the shrine of Asclepius at Epidaurus, acknowledges with regard to one of his various ills 1 :—
“ And concerning this thing I besought the god.”
The parallel is all the more remarkable because the verb ? used for ‘‘ beseech’ seems to be the technical term in such a context. It is moreover factually important, as showing very clearly that Christ ? was occasionally, even by the piety of St. Paul, taken as the Saviour in the literal sense of “Healer.” Whoever fears that the New Testament may suffer from the discovery of this parallel should read the whole inscription of M. Julius Apellas and the whole twelfth chapter of 2 Corinthians side by side, and then compare the souls and the fortunes of the two men of Asia Minor, Apellas and Paul. Two patients besought their Healers for healing, and to which of them did his Healer give the most? What is greater? the cures of Apellas’ various ailments, following one another in rapid succession, and paid for in hard cash to Asclepius of Epidaurus? or the answer that St. Paul received ὁ instead of bodily healing >—
““ My grace is sufficient for thee: for My strength is made perfect in weakness.”’
And which is the more valuable text? the advertising ‘inscription on marble, ordered by the god himself*? or that line of a letter, wrung from suffering and sent in confidence to the poor folk of a great city, without a thought that it would survive the centuries ?
7. But there are other ways in which St. Paul made use of the forms and formulae of his age, as they presented them-
1 Dittenberger, Sylloge,? No. 804392,,8£170, καὶ yap περὶ τούτου παρεκάλεσα τὸν θεόν.
2 Wilke-Grimm, Clavis Novi Testamenti,? quotes παρακαλεῖν θεούς or θεόν only from Josephus. There are good examples in the letter of Zoilus (p. 153, n. 4 above) and in a letter, valuable to the historian of religion, from Aurelius Demareus to his wife Aurelia Arsinoé in the Oxyrhynchus Papyri, No. 107092, (3rd cent. A.D.), τὸν μέγαν θεὸν Σάραπιν παρακαλῶ περὶ τῆς ζωῆς ὑμῶν.
3 To Him the word ‘‘ Lord ” refers, cf. verse 9, beginning and end.
4 2 Cor. xii. 9. 5 Cf. 1. 31 f. of the inscription.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 309
selves to him, principally, no doubt, in inscriptions. When in reviewing his past work he professes 1 :—
“T have kept faith,”
and when, probably in the 2nd cent. Α.Ὁ., the Ephesian M. Aurelius Agathopus, full of gratitude to Artemis, makes the same profession in an inscription in the theatre ? :—
“T kept faith,”
both no doubt are drawing from the same source, from the stock of formulae current in Asia Minor.2 On the other hand the metaphor employed by the apostle in the same passage,
“T have fought the good fight. ... Henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness .,. . ,”
reminds one of phrases in an inscription relating to an athlete of the 2nd cent. A.D., also in the theatre at Ephesus ὅ :-
“He fought three fights, and twice was crowned.”
No doubt St. Paul in his time read inscriptions like this.
The following is. a still more striking case of contact between the apostle and the world. In the Pastoral Epistles we read § :—
“ Rebuke not an elder, but intreat him as a father; the younger men as brethren: the elder women as mothers; the younger as sisters in all purity.”
In the same way a pagan inscription of the 2nd or 3rd cent.
1 2 Tim. iv. 7, τὴν πίστιν τετήρηκα.
2 The Collection of Ancient Greek Inscriptions in the British Museum, Part III. No. 587 b, ὅτι τὴν πίστιν ἐτήρησα (i.e. with the Gerusia or Senate).
3 Cf. also Wettstein’s Novum Testamentum Graecum, II., Amstelaedami, 1752, p. 366. The parallels show that πίστις in the passage in St. Paul means “ faith ’ in the sense of ‘“‘ loyalty,’ not “‘ the faith ” in the sense of ‘‘ creed.” Further passages are quored by Ww. Jerusaion, Wiener Studien, 1, p. 56.
4 2 Tim. iv. 7, 8, τὸν καλὸν ἀγῶνα ἠγώνισμαι, . .. λοιπὸν ἀπόκειταί μοι ὁ τῆς δικαιοσύνης στέφανος.
5 The Collection of Ancient Greek Inscriptions in the British Museum, Part III. No. 604, ἠγωνίσατο ἀγῶνας τρεῖς, ἐστέφθη δύω. J. H. Moulton, The
-Expository Times, October 1908, p. 33, adds another inscription of 267 B.c.
6 y Tim. v. I, 2, πρεσβυτέρῳ μὴ ἐπιπλήξῃς, ἀλλὰ παρακάλει ὦ ὡς πατέρα, νεωτέρους ὡς ἀδελφούς, πρεσβυτέρας ὡς μητέρας, νεωτέρας ὡς ἀδελφὰς ἐν πάσῃ ἁγνείᾳ.
310 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
A.D., at Olbia on the Black Sea,! in honour of Theocles, the son of Satyrus, boasts of him as
“Dearing himself to his equals in age as a brother, to his elders as a son, to children as a father, being adorned with all virtue.”
Though much later in date than St. Paul this inscription is not dependent on the New Testament; both it and St. Paul have been influenced by old tradition. Pithy sayings of ancient teachers, such as Wettstein ? has collected in his note on the New Testament passage, were in the time of St. Paul commonplaces of popular ethics. They were taken over by him (perhaps after reading them in inscriptions *) with a sure instinct of appreciation for noble thought and pregnant expression, and in the same way their echo reaches us again later on from the Black Sea.
Much might be said about ancient popular ethics in general and the fruitful effects of the same on early Christian popular ethics. The otherwise somewhat barren inscriptions,‘ espe- cially complimentary and funeral inscriptions, yield an abundance of ethical detailed material. The praises lavished on the meritorious citizens, or the thankfully commemorated good qualities of deceased persons, will not always tell us what those people were really like, but all such statements reflect the moral ideals of the men who set up the inscriptions, and whatever seems stereotyped may be reckoned part of the world’s fixed moral consciousness at the time. Had I unlimited space at my disposal I would deal here in special detail with sculptured lines that reflect: the best religious ethics of paganism, laws of those who, “ having not the law, are a law unto themselves,” ® such as the wonderful Delphic
1 Inscviptiones Antiquae Ovae Septentrionalis -Pontt Euxini Graecae et Latinae ed. Latyschev, I. No. 22x, (cf. IV. p. 266f.), τοῖς μὲν ἡλικιώταις προσφε- ρόμενος ὡς ἀδελφός, τοῖς δὲ πρεσβυτέροις ὡς vids, τοῖς δὲ παισὶν ὡς πατήρ, πάση ἀρετῆ κεκοσμημένος.
2 Novum Test t Gr , IL. p. 339. L. Martens (letter, Duisburg, 18 May, 1910) refers me to Plato, Apology 31 B, ἑκάστῳ προσιόντα ὥσπερ πατέρα ἢ ἀδελφὸν πρεσβύτερον.
3. This conjecture has since been confirmed to me by one of the inscriptions from Priene, No. 11755 . (Ist cent. B.C.) : πρεσβυτέρους τιμῶν ὡς γονεῖ]ς, rods δὲ καθήλικας ὡς ἀδελφούς, τοὺς δὲ [νεωτέρους ὡς παῖδας(  )].
4 For the literary sources I refer to the works of Georg Heinrici and Paul Wendland. 5 Rom. ii. 14.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 311
commandments,! or the injunctions from a sanctuary at Philadelphia? of the Apocalypse, which were bestowed in a dream and are so insistent in their popular appeal. Truly it is one of the marks of St. Paul’s fineness of perception that, far from denying the “‘ world ” all moral attributes, he credits the heathen ® with a general fund of real morality regulated by conscience, in the same way as he praises the depth of their religious insight.‘
In previous works ὅ I have given a not inconsiderable number of examples of the secular origin of supposed exclu- sively “‘ New Testament” ethical concepts. For the sake of argument I was bound to deal only with the more unusual concepts, when of course the agreement between the apostles and the world would be most striking, but if attention is paid also to the concepts belonging to everyday morality we discover an extensive common ground on which the apostles could and did take their stand. Particularly as we read the pastoral exhortations of St. Paul in his letters (and not least in the Pastoral Epistles) and others imitating them, we feel that, instead of being spoken to the winds like so much obsolete wisdom, they were bound to find in the popular consciousness of their day a powerful reverberating medium.
Here is an example. The expressions “‘ conversation,’ “to have conversation,” ® etc. (A.V.), in an ethical sense (=" behaviour, manner of life,” ‘‘ behave, live,” etc., R.V.), are frequent in the apostolic writers, and many commentators explain them as a Hebraism. But they were common to the ancient world as a whole, and it is senseless to make a difference between Semitic and non-Semitic. I have given the necessary quotations elsewhere already,’ but here is an
1 Dittenberger, Sylloge®, No. 1268 (inscription from Miletopolis, 3rd cent. B.C.).
τ τα, No. 985 (1st or 2nd cent. a.p:). For this particularly valuable inscription we are indebted to Keil and von Premerstein, Bericht tibey eine ἀνία Reise in Lydien, p. τ ff. (see p. 17, n. 1 above).
3 Cf. especially Rom. ii. 14 ff. :
4 Acts xvii. 28.
5 Especially in Bibelstudien and Neue Bibelstudien (= Bible Studies).
6 ἀναστροφή and ἀναστρέφεσθαι.
? Bibelstudien, p. 83; Neue Bibelstudien, p. 22; Bible Studies, pp. 88, 194; and, before that, E. L. Hicks in the Classical Review, 1 (1887) p.6; and now Moulton and Milligan, The Expositor, March 1908, p. 269; W. H. P. Hatch, Some Illustrations, p. 136 f.
312 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
additional illustration that appeals to the eye: an inscrip- tion 1 (Fig. 57) in honour of the Gymnasiarch Apollodorus, the son of Pyrrhus, on a marble pedestal in the gymnasium at Pergamum, of the Roman period (after 133 B.c.). It reads thus :—
ὁ δῆμος ἐτίμησεν ᾿Απολλόδωρον Πύρρον
χρυσῶι στεφάνωι καὶ εἰκόνι χαλκῆι
ἀρετῆς ἕνεκεν καὶ εὐνοίας τῆς εἰς ἑαυτὸν
καὶ διὰ τὸ γυμνασιαρχήσαντα
5. καλῶς καὶ ἐνδόξως ἀναστραφῆναι.
The people honoured Apollodorus, the son of Pyrrhus, with a golden crown and a brazen image by reason of his virtue and goodwill towards them, and because of his good and glorious behaviour when he was Gymnasiarch.
Extraordinarily interesting are the cases in which the apostles, being still in living contact with the lower classes, adopt the fine expressions which, coined in the workshop and the market-place, are a terse and pithy presentment of what the people thought was good. There is a phrase we find on the tombstone of a humble man? of the early Empire in a country district not far from the home of St. Paul in the south-west of Asia Minor. To the eye wearied with the bombast of overloaded eulogy in showier inscriptions it appears scarcely noticeable at first, and yet how eloquent in reality is this simple form of praise: Daphnus, the best among the gardeners, has raised himself a hero’s resting- place (Heroén), and now has reached this goal,’
‘after that he had much laboured.”’
To anyone with a sense for beauty in simplicity these lines
1 Die Inschriften von Pergamon, No. 459. The facsimile there given on the scale of 1 : 7°5 is reproduced here (Fig. 57) by kind permission of the Directors of the State Museums, Berlin. (The translation of the inscription in the first edition of this book was incorrect, as pointed out by Johannes Imelmann; cf. also Eberhard Nestle, Berliner Philologische Wochenschrift, 28 [1908] col. 1527.)
2 The inscription was discovered in the village of Ebedjik (S. W. Asia Minor) in the house of the mollah Mehmet, and published by Heberdey and Kalinka, Bericht δεν zwei Reisen im stidwestlichen Kleinasien [p. 17, n. 1 above], p. 41, No. 59, pera τὸ πολλὰ κοπιᾶσαι. [In German spelling, Ibedschik. It is on the site of Bubon (Pliny, H.N. V. 27), in N. Lycia. Tr.]
* This translation of the brief ταῦτα of the inscription (cf. p. 203, n. 4 above) is very free.
ΟΔΗΜΟΣ ΕἼΪΜΗΣ ΕΝΑΠολλοδω PONTIYPFOY
ἡ ΠΝ: ΤΕ ΦΑΝΩΊΙΚΑΙΕΙΚΟΝῚ Χ AAKHI
ΠΣ ΕΝΕΚΕΝΚΑΙΕΥΝΟΙΑΣΤΗΣΕΙΣΕ ΑΥΤΟΝ ΚΑΊΤΔΙΑΤΟΓΥΜΝΑΣΙΑΡΧΉΣΑΝΤΑ ΚΑΛΩΙΣΚΑΙΕΝΔΟΞΩΣΑΝΑΣΤΙΆΦΗΝΑΙ Fic. 57.-Marble Pedestal from Pergamum with an Inscription
in honour of the Gymnasiarch Apollodorus of Pergamum. Roman
Period. Original still at Pergamum. By permission of the Directors of the State Museums at Berlin.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 313
concerning the much labour of the gardener Daphnus are as a green spray. of ivy tenderly clasping the tombstone of its old friend. And the words of St. John, in the Revelation, are just as racy, just as primal, when, recording the voice heard from heaven, he gives a slight Asiatic tinge! to an old Biblical phrase,? and says that the dead “‘ rest from their labours.” ὃ. St. Paul, however, the artisan missionary, catches the popular tone of his native country even better when he boasts * of an Ephesian Mary, while she was yet living, that
“she much laboured for you.”
Again, in a Roman cemetery ὅ of later date, we hear the old popular phrase re-echoed by a wife who praises her husband,
““who laboured much for me.”
In fact, with regard to all that Paul the tentmaker has to say about labour, we ought to place ourselves as it were within St. Paul’s own class, the artisan ® class of the Imperial age, and then feel the force of his words. They all become more life-like when restored to their original historical milieu. “1 laboured more abundantly than they all ’’ 7—these words, applied by St. Paul to missionary work, came originally from the joyful pride of the skilled craftsman, who, working by the piece, was able to hand in the largest amount of goods on pay-day. The frequent references to “‘ labour in
1 He says κόπων instead of ἔργων. He uses the latter word immediately afterwards: ᾿
2 Cf. LXX Gen. ii. 2.
3 Rev. xiv. 13, ἐκ τῶν κόπων αὐτῶν. ([Cf£. the epitaph in Bushey churchyard, said to have been copied before 1860, with the last words of ‘‘ a poor woman who always was tired ’’ owing to domestic drudgery: ‘‘ Don’t mourn for me now, don’t mourn for me never, For I’m going to do nothing for ever and ever,” given in full in the Spectator, 2 Dec. 1922, p. 834. TR.]
4 Rom. xvi. 6, πολλὰ ἐκοπίασεν εἰς ὑμᾶς; cf. also Rom. xvi. 12.
5 Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum, No. 9552, inscription from the cemetery . of Pontianus at Rome (date ?), refs [= ὅστις] μοι πολλὰ ἐκοπίασεν.
δ. St. Paul speaks of himself as a manual labourer in 1 Cor. iv. 12, and he writes to manual labourers (1 Thess. iv. 11). There are two small studies of great importance in this connexion: Franz Delitzsch (1850-1922), Jiidisches Handwerkerleben zur Zeit Jesu,? Erlangen, 1875 ; and Samuel Krauss, “ Parallelen im Handwerk,” Vierteljahrsschrift fir Bibelkunde, Talmud und patristische Studien, 3 (1907) p. 67 ff.
7 1 Cor. xv. 10, περισσότερον αὐτῶν πάντων ἐκοπίασα.
314 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
vain ” 1 are a trembling echo of the discouragement resulting from a piece of work being rejected for alleged bad finish and therefore not paid for. And then the remark to the pious sluggards of Thessalonica ? :
“That if any would not work, neither should he eat.”
I remember a newspaper controversy a generation ago, in which my opponent, a social reformer not quite so well up in his Bible as he should have been, denounced this text as a modern heartless capitalist phrase. As a matter of fact, St. Paul was probably borrowing a bit of good old workshop morality? a maxim applied no doubt hundreds of times by industrious workmen as they forbade a lazy apprentice to sit down to dinner.
In the same way we can only do justice to the remarks in the New Testament about wages by examining them in situ, amidst their native surroundings. Jesus and St. Paul spoke with distinct reference to the life of the common people. If you elevate such utterances to the sphere of the Kantian moral philosophy, and then reproach Primitive Christianity with teaching morality for the sake of reward, you have not only misunderstood the words, you have torn them up by the roots. It means that you have failed to distinguish between the concrete illustration of a popular preacher, perfectly spontaneous and intelligible in the native sur- roundings of Primitive Christianity, and a carefully con- sidered ethical theory of fundamental importance to first principles. The sordid, ignoble suggestions, so liable to arise in the lower class, are altogether absent from the sayings of Jesus and His apostle, as shown by the parable of the labourers in the vineyard and the analogous reliance of St. Paul solely upon grace.
Still more instructive than the parallelism of single ethical phrases in popular use are the formulae in which pairs of ideas or whole series of ideas have united. When in Titus ii. 4, 5 the young women are exhorted to be “ loving to their husbands, loving to their children, soberminded,” 4 this is the voice of popular ethics, for precisely this ideal of woman-
1 E.g. Gal. iv. 11; Phil. ii. 16; 1 Cor. xv. 58. 2 2 Thess. iii. 10, εἴ τις οὐ θέλει ἐργάζεσθαι, μηδὲ ἐσθιέτω.
3 See Wettstein’s quotations at 2 Thess. iii. 10. 4 φιλάνδρους εἶναι, φιλοτέκνους, σώφρονας.
ἸΟΥΛΊΟΣ ΒΑΣΣΟΣ OTAKIAIATIOAAR THIAYKYTATH YNAIKIGIAANAP AIPDIAOTEKN YNBILQZAEH ΑΜΕΜΠΤΊΩ,Σ
ETH A-
a
—— ee)
Fic. 58.—Marble Tombstone of Otacilia Polla of Pergamum, about the time of Hadrian. Now in the garden of Pasha-Oglu Hussein, in the Selinus valley, near Pergamum. By permission of the Directors of the State Museums at Berlin.
SOCIAL’ AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 315
hood 1 is set up by the inscriptions. In an epitaph at Perga- mum, of about the time of Hadrian? (Figure 58), one Otacilia Polla is called ‘‘ loving to her husband and loving to her children ”” :—
Ἰούλιος Βάσσος Julius Bassus to Otacilia Ὀτακιλία Πώλλη ᾿ : ἢ : τῇ γλυκυτάτη Polla, his sweetest wife. Loving [γ]υναικὶ φιλάνδρ[] to her husband, and loving to
5 καὶ φιλοτέκνω συνβιωσάση her children, she lived with ἀμέμπτως ἔτηλ. him unblamably 30 years.
That this formula was no extempore formation is proved by a quotation from Plutarch, by an inscription from Paros ὃ of Imperial age, and by a metrical inscription from Tegea.* The collocation “ loving to her husband and soberminded ”’ is also not rare; it occurs in epitaphs for women of the Imperial period at Termessus in Pisidia,> Prusias on the Hypius in Bithynia,* and Heraclia on the Black Sea.’
Whole series of ethical concepts are brought together in the well-known Primitive Christian lists of virtues and vices. These were no new creations, but based on Jewish and pagan series—this has long been recognised.* But it will be
1 It would be an interesting and comparatively simple task to sketch the ancient ideal of womanhood as shown.in the inscriptions and papyri. A comparison with the Jewish inscriptions and the N.T. would reveal a far-reaching agreement throughout the whole of antiquity.
2 Die Inschriften von Pergamon, No. 604 (cf. Neue Bibelstudien, p. 83 f.; Bible Studies, p. 255 f.). The drawing (scale 1 : 10) is here reproduced with the kind consent of the Directors of the State Museums, Berlin (Fig. 58).
3 References in Neue Bibelstudien, p. 83 {.; Bible Studies, p. 255 f.
4 Bulletin de Correspondance Hellénique, 25 (1901) p. 279, φιλότεκνε φίλανδρε, “Ὁ thou loving one to children and husband!” The date cannot be exactly determined. .
5 Ibid. 23 (1899) p. 301, τὴν σώφρονα καὶ φίλανδρον, ᾿᾿ soberminded and loving .to her husband.” :
8. Ibid. 25 (1901) p. 88, ἡ σόφρων (sic) καὶ φίλανδρος γυνὴ γενομένη, ‘ who was a soberminded wife and loving to her husband.”
7 Ibid. 22 (1898) p. 496, ἡ φίλανδρος καὶ σ[ὠ]ῴφρων ἡ φιλόσοφος ζήσασα κοσμίως, “loving to her husband and soberminded, a lover of wisdom, she lived modestly ” (cf. 1 Tim. ii. 9 for this last word).
® The latest treatment of this subject, brief but excellent, is in H. Lietz- mann’s commentary on Rom. i. (Handbuch zum N.T., 111. p. 11, *p. 34f.). Abundant material was collected by Albrecht Dieterich, Nekyia, Bettrage zur Erklavrung dev neuentdeckten Petrusapokalypse, Leipzig, 1893, p. 163 ff. Since thén the literature has grown. The subject is not confined to the Mediter- onnann af far avamnla Chinace licte of vices in the ‘‘ Book of the Most
316 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
as well to give up looking for the models exclusively in philosophical literature, although there may still be much to find there! The popular lists of virtues and vices are of more direct importance; they show better than the philo- sophical texts what had really made its way among the people. Scattered in many museums we find specimens of the counters ? used in an ancient game resembling draughts : one side of the counter bears a number (up to 25 or 30 or 40), and on the other side is a word addressed to a person, occasionally in verbal form, e.g. “ Art thou glad? ” or “ Thou wilt scarcely laugh,’ but nearly always substantives or adjectives, generally in the vocative case. These give us a large number of popular names of vices* and virtues; the Greek loan-words among the Latin lists show the Hellen- istic influence, and the decidedly vulgar form of the Latin words indicates that the game was a popular one. Although we have not yet recovered all the counters necessary for the game, and the presumable sequences of the counters are not yet certain, the parallels with St. Paul strike us immediately. Take, for instance, the list of vices ὅ in x Cor. vi. 9, 10, “Fornicators, idolaters, adulterers, effeminate, abusers of themselves with mankind, thieves, covetous, drunkards, revilers, extortioners.” With the exception of “ covetous,”’ which is rather colourless, and “ idolaters,” which is not to be expected in a pagan list, all these will be found substantially, word for word, on the counters.®
High concerning Deeds and Retaliations,” a Taoist work translated by Wilhelm Schiller in Die Welt des Ostens (supplement to the “ Kiautschou- Post ’’) 2 (1909), No. 15.
1 The astrologers, e.g. Vettius Valens, also furnish plenty of material.
2 Details in Chr. Huelsen, Tessere lusorie, Rémische Mitteilungen, 11 (1896) p. 227 ff.; F. Buecheler, Rhein. Museum, New Series, 52 (1897) p. 392 ff.
3 gaudesne, vix rides.
4 The vices greatly preponderate on the counters that have been preserved.
5 Even Lietzmann (loc. cit. 4p. 11) considered this list to be purely Jewish.
6. St. Paul; The counters ;
πόρνοι impudes (the » wanting as in Κρήσκης, 2 Ti im. iv. το) μοιχοί motce, moece
μαλακοί patice
ἀρσενοκοῖται cinaidus, cinaedus
κλέπται fur
μέθυσοι ebriose and vinose
λοίδοροι trico ἢ
ἅρπαγες arpax
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 317
The comic dramatists afford us help in completing these popular lists of vices. No certain explanation has yet been given of the mention of such rare crimes as parricide and matricide in the list of vices in 1 Tim. i. 91. The text there enumerates :—
“The lawless and disobedient, the ungodly and sinners, unholy and profane, murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, manslayers, whoremongers, them that defile themselves with mankind, menstealers, liars, perjured persons.’* Now compare the “ scolding” of Ballio the pander in the Pseudolus of Plautus!: quite a number of the most charac- teristic terms of abuse in that popular scene occur again in St. Paul’s list, either literally or in forms nearly synonymous.?
Nor is the parallelism between the New Testament and the world wanting in the corresponding lists of virtues. This is shown by comparing 2 Peter i. 5, 6 with an inscription from Asia Minor, Ist cent. B.c., in honour of one Herostratus, the son of Dorcalion.? The inscription mentions successively the faith, virtue, righteousness, godliness, and diligence of the person to be honoured; and the apostle incites his readers
The last word ἅρπαξ was current as a loan-word in Latincomedy. In St. Paul it should probably not be translated ‘‘ robber’ but rendered by some other word, like ‘‘swindler”’ (‘‘extortioner,” A.V.,'R.V.). ‘‘ Robbers”’ were Ayoraé, with whom St: Paul became acquainted on his journeys (2 Cor. xi. 26).—For μαλακός cf. letter No. 5 above, p. 164, n. 4.
1 Cf. Hermann Usener, Italische Volksjustiz, Rhein. Museum, New Series, 56 (1901) p. 23 ff. The passages in Wettstein, Novum Testamentum, II. p. 318 f., especially those from Pollux, afford a very interesting parallel to Plautus and St. Paul.
2 St. Paul: Plautus :
ἀνόμοις ἰορίγμρα
2 y
ἀσεβ cae } sacvrilege
ανοσιοις
ἁμαρτωλοῖς sceleste
- βεβήλοις caenum and . inpure ,
πατρολῴαις parvicida.—verbevasti patrem et matrem, to which the καὶ person abused answers scornfully : atqgue occidi quogque μητρολῴαις potius quam cibum praehiberem.
πόρνοις impudice
ἀρσενοκοίταις pernities adulescentum (this parallel is not certain)
ψεύσταις fraudulente
ἐπιόρκοις periure
3 Dittenberger. Orientis Graect Inscribtiones Selectae, No, 438.
318 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
to diligence in faith (= belief), virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness, and love.}
8. The correspondences we have noted: so far relate only to isolated details of,the popular religion and popular morality of the world contemporary with the apostolic texts. The cumulative effect even of such details should be sufficiently remarkable, but there are besides in the New Testament whole groups of thought, the peculiar strength and beauty of which we can only appreciate from the vantage-ground of the ancient world. Recent discoveries have made it possible to reconstruct large portions of Hellenistic popular law, which was previously known only in miserable frag- ments, and this gives us an uncommonly valuable, means of judging some of the figurative religious language of Primitive Christianity. It has of course long been known, and mono- graphs have been written to prove, that St. Paul was strongly influenced by legal ideas?; but the fact was not sufficiently
1 Inscription : ἄνδρα ἀγαθὸν γενόμενον καὶ διενένκαντα
,ὔ [ἢ 2 a A sf 4 πίστει καὶ ἀρετῇ καὶ δ[ικ]αιοσύνῃ καὶ
2 Peter:
σπουδὴν πᾶσαν παρεισενέγκαντες > a ~ ἐπιχορηγήσατε ἐν τῇ πίστει ὑμῶν τὴν
ἀρετήν, ἐν δὲ τῇ ἀρετῇ τὴν γνῶσιν, ἐν δὲ τῇ γνώσει τὴν ἐγκράτειαν, ἐν δὲ τῇ ἐγκρατείᾳ τὴν ὑπομονήν, ἐν δὲ τῇ ὑπομονῇ τὴν εὐσέβειαν, etc. Cf. also the remarks on the beginning of 2 Peter in Bibelstudien, Pp. 277 f.; Bible Studies, p. 360 ff.
2 In view of the importance of this point I offer the following statement ‘of the literature of the subject, as far as it is known to me :—
John Selden [1584-1654], De synedriis et praefecturis juridicis veterum Ebracorum, Liber II, Londini, 1653, c. XII., § iii., p. 523 (cited by Schramm, p. 398) ;
Daniel Schraderus, Evevcitatio juridica de juvisprudentia Pauli Apostoli, Halle/Magdeburg, 1695 (cf. Eger, Rechtsgeschichtliches zum N.T., P- 27);
Johannes Samuel Stryck (Strickius), De Pauli jurisprudentia (title uncertain), Halle 1695, 71743 (cf. Schramm, p. 398, and Winer-Schmiedel § 3, 1 [p. 18]);
Joh. Henricus Schramm, De stupenda Pauli Abpostoli eruditione, Herborn, 1710 (I use the edition printed together with his commentary on
‘Titus, Lugd. Bat., 1763) ;
Johannes Ortwin Westenberg, Paulus Tarsensis Jurisconsultus, Frane- querae, 1722, also Baruthi 1738 (cf. my Bibelstudien, Ὁ. 103; Bible Studies, p. 107 £.), and in his Opuscula Academica I, Leipzig, 1794;
Gg. Wh. Kirchmaier (title not known to me, cf. Winer-Schmiedel, § 3, 1 [p. 18]), Wittenberg, 1730;
edacBelacxat .. . τὴν πλείστ[η]ν εἰσ -
ενηνεγμένον σπουδήν.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 319
accounted for by comparisons either with Roman or with Jewish law, the latter, so far as the Diaspora was concerned, being probably for the most part a dead letter. We now receive help of a far different order from the law that was alive in the popular consciousness up and down the Hellenistic area in which the New Testament originated. A few examples will confirm this statement.1
The stupendous force of dogmatic tradition, and the fact that the word s/ave ? with its satellites has been translated servant, to the total-effacement of its ancient significance, in our Bibles, have brought it about that one of the most original and at the same time most popular appraisals of the work of Christ by St. Paul and his school has been, I think, only vaguely understood among us.’ I refer to the metaphor of our redemption by Christ from the slavery of sin, the law, idols, men, and death 4—a metaphor influenced
C. F. Freiesleben (cf. Winer-Schmiedel, <bid.), Leipzig, 1840;
My Bibelstudien (1895) and Neue Bibelstudien (1897) ;
A. Halmel, Uber romisches Recht im Galaterbrief, Essen, 1895;
Fr. Sieffert, Das Recht im N.T., Géttingen, 1900;
(Th. Mommsen, ‘' Die Rechtsverhdltnisse des Apostels Paulus,’’ Zeitschrift fiir neutestamentliche Wissenschaft 2 (1901) p. 81 ff. ;)
Max Conrat [Cohn], ‘‘ Das Erbrecht im Galaterbrief,’’ Zeitschr. f. neutest. Wiss. 5 (1904), p. 204 ff. ;
My Licht vom Osten, 1908;
William Duncan Ferguson, The Legal Terms Common to the Macedonian Inscriptions and the New Testament, Chicago, 1913;
W. S. Muntz, Rome, St. Paul and the Early Church: The Influence of Roman Law on St. Paul’s Teaching and Phtaseology and on the Development of the Church, London, 1913 (which I know only from the bibliography in the Theologische Literatur-Zeitung, 1913, col. 799) ;
The important works by Otto Eger already mentioned at p. 119, n. 1 above.
1 Here Otto Eger (cf. p. 119, n. 1 above) has continued working most help- fully; I refer especially, for instance, to his luminous exposition of 1 Cor. iii. 9 ff. by the aid of ancient building law (Rechtsgeschichtliches zum N.T., Pp. 37 ff.).
2 In Luther’s Bible the word “‘ slave ” (Sklave) does not occur once, although its equivalent is used times without number in the original (Old and New Testament). Knecht, the word used by Luther, is for modern Germans no longer the same as ‘‘slave.” [The R.V. rendering, ‘‘ bondservant,’’ in text and margin, has helped to correct the misapprehensions of English readers. “‘ Slave ’’ does occur in the A.V., but only twice : Jer. ii. 14, Rev. xviii. 13. Tr.]
3 Similarly the mistranslation of διαθήκη as ‘‘ covenant ’’ instead of “ testa- ment” has interfered with the right understanding of another great group of ideas. The blame in this case does not fall on Luther.
4 Cf. my Paulus, p. 100 ff., *p. 134 ff.; St. Paul, p. 149 ff., *p. 172 ff.
320 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
by the customs and technical formulae of sacred manu- missions in antiquity.1_ I should like to illustrate a little more particularly this instance of St. Paul’s having been influenced by the popular law of the world in which he lived.?
Inscriptions at Delphi have been the principal means of enlightening us concerning the nature and ritual of manu- mission with a religious object in ancient times? The French archaeologists have discovered and published a large number of records of manumission relating to several different centuries,* and particularly to that one which gave rise to
1 Johannes Weiss, Die Christliche Freiheit nach dey Verktindigung des Apostels Paulus, Gottingen, 1902, has the merit of bringing St. Paul’s idea of freedom into connexion with ancient thought on the subject. But I think the author has gone to too high a bookshelf: the inscriptions, to be found among the folios at the bottom of the bookcase, are here more instructive than the philosophers on the higher shelves, just as we saw in the case of the lists of vices, p. 320 ff. above. JI agree in thinking that St. Paul was influenced by popular philosophy, but I would lay stress on the mediation, mentioned by Weiss, of popular culture, into which a great deal of philosophy had percolated.
2 Since the earlier editions of this book the subject has become fairly well known and has been made use of in religious literature of the practical order (e.g. by Gottfried Traub, Gott und wir, Heilbronn, 1912, p. 42 ff.; and by Harrington C. Lees [who became Archbishop of Melbourne, Australia, in 1921. Tr.], Christ and His Slaves, being Devotional Studies from the Egyptian Papyri, London, 1911).
8 The pioneer works were Ernestus Curtius, Amecdota Delphica, Berolini, 1843, pp. 10-47, 56-75, and Ῥ, Foucart, Mémoire sur l’affranchissement des . esclaves par forme de vente a une divinité d’aprés les inscriptions de Delphes (Archives des missions scientifiques, deuxiéme série, t. III., Paris, 1866, Pp. 375-424; also separately, Paris, 1867). Cf. also Ludwig Mitteis, Reichs- recht und Volksvecht in den Ostlichen Provinzen des rémischen Kaiserrvetchs, Leipzig, 1891, p. 374 ff. (a short account, but containing everything that is essential), and E. Schiirer, Geschichte des jidischen Volkes, 111. p. 53f., ‘p. 93f. There is much material on the subject of manumission customs in Gualterus Rensch, De manumissionum titulis apud Thessalos, Diss. Phil. Halenses, XVIII. 2, Halis Saxonum, 1908. Add to these A. B. Drachmann, De manumissione seruorum apud Graecos qualem ex inscriptionibus cog- noscimus, Nordisk Tidskrift for Filologi, Ny Raekke, vol. 8 (Copenhagen, 1887/88), pp. 1-74; and especially A. Calderini, La manomissione 6 la con- dizione det liberti in Grecia, Milano, 1908. Other literature in Dittenberger, Sylloge® 3, p. 352 ff. ;
4 Including two records of the manumission of Jewish slaves between 170 and 157 B.c., probably prisoners from the Maccabaean wars (cf. Schiirer, 111.2 p. 27,4 p. 55 f.), and a manumission by Judaeus, a Jew, who sells his slave Amyntas to Apollo, 119 B.c. (Juster, Les Juzfs, II. p. 327). This Judaeus is most probably identical with one of the two Jewish slaves manumitted some forty years before.
᾿ΒΙΓΟΙΒΘΊΤΙΙ ΠΙΙΈΤΙ JO ΞΘΡΙΟΌΘΙ JUSTIOUeS ΞΠΟΙΘΤΠΓΙ πητλὰ peqriosur ‘tydjeq 38 οπμοᾶν jo 9Ππι91 oy} so [TBM Bururezyoy—-6S “91. 1
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 321
the New Testament. After two thousand years the records stand to-day almost uninjured on the polygonal rétaining- wall of the temple of Apollo (Fig. 59), the blocks of which seem, despite their bulk, to have collectively the effect of a poem in stone. Climbing greenery and blue blossoms greet you from the joints of the stone if you read the texts in springtime.!
But these are not records of something-peculiar to Delphi. Manumission on religious grounds was practised all about Parnassus and probably throughout ancient Greece, and it even made its way into Jewish and Christian ecclesiastical .custom. As examples from places outside Delphi I may refer to inscriptions at Physcus in Aetolia ? (sale to Athene, and cent. B.c.), at Amphissa? (sale to Asclepius, Imperial period), and also in Cos # (sale to Adrastia and Nemesis [9], and or Ist cent. B.c.). Ernst Curtius > has-collected records from Naupactus (sale to Dionysus), Chaeronia, Tithora, and Coronia (sale to Serapis), Chalia (sale to Apollo Nesiotes), Elatia and Stiris (sale to Asclepius), Daulis (sale to Athene Polias). Th. Macridy has published records from Notion.® We find this sacred kind of manumission among Jews? “ἴῃ the house of prayer ’’ in two stone records from Panti- capaeum,® the first of which can be certainly dated 81 a.D.; and there is a record® of great interest from Gorgippia, 4I A.D., ‘referring to the cult of ‘the Most High God.”
1 On 22 and 23 May, 1906, I was able to see these highly important remains of ancient civilisation in situ (Fig. 59). The topographical remarks below (p. 329) are the result of my own observation on 12 May, 1906.
2 Bulletin de Correspondance Hellénique, 22 (1898) p. 355.
3 Dittenberger, Sylloge,? No. 844.
4 Paton and Hicks, No. 29; and now Herzog, Koische Forschungen und Funde, p. 391. This is not a record of manumission, but manumission of a sacred character is mentioned in it. Cf. p. 327, n. 6.
5 Cf. p. 320, n. 3 above.
* Jahreshefte des Osterreichischen Archdologischen: Institutes in Wien, 8 (1905) p. 155 ff. (Pointed out to me by Theodor Wiegand, postcard, Miletus, c. 26 May, 1908; and by Baron F. Hiller von Gaertringen, postcard, Berlin W., 4 June, 1908.) ,
7 Abundant material bearing on the subject in Juster II. p. 80 ff. Note- worthy also is the document, Oxyrhynchus Papyri No. 1205, (291 A.D.), in which the synagogue pays the redemption-money.
8. Inscriptiones Antiquae Ovae Septentrionalis Ponti Euxini, ed. Latyschev, Vol. II. Nos. 52 and 53.
® Ibid. No. 400.
Ψ
322 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
These Jewish and Judaeo-pagan records} are of great importance in our problem, as sure proofs of the influence of the pagan rite on Jewish Hellenism? in the time of the apostle Paul. Finally, it has long been recognised by experts that ‘‘manumission in the church’? was nothing but a Christianised form of the old Greek custom.
But between the Greek usage and the practice of the early Church there-stands St. Paul, who made the ancient custom the basis of one of his profoundest contemplations about the Christ.
What was this custom? Among the various ways in which the manumission of a slave could take place by ancient law 4 we find the solemn rite of fictitious purchase of the slave by some divinity. The owner comes with the slave to the temple, sells him there to the god, and receives the purchase money from the temple treasury, the slave having previously paid it in there out of his savings. The slave is now the property of the god; not, however, a slave of the temple, but a protégé of the god. Against all the world, especially his former master, he is a completely free man; at the utmost a few pious obligations to his old master are imposed upon him.
The rite takes place before witnesses; a record is taken, and often. perpetuated on stone.
The usual form of these documents must have been extremely well known, because they are so numerous. It is like this > :—
Date. “N.N. sold to the Pythian Apollo a male slave named X.Y. at a price of —minae, for freedom (07 on con- dition that he shall be free, etc.).” Then follow any special arrangements and the names of the witnesses. .
1 See Schirer, III,® p. 53f., * p. 93.
3. For a similar process in another field cf. the prayers for vengeance from Rheneia (Appendix I. below, p. 413), which exhibit a secularisation of the Jewish ritual for the expiation of an unexplained murder.
5 Manumissio in ecclesia, cf. Curtius, p. 26f.; Mitteis, p. 375; and the Jewish manumission “ in the house of prayer,” p. 321 above.
4 Cf. Mitteis, p. 372 ff. The redemptio servi suis nummis is discussed by Lothar von Seuffert, Der Loskauf von Sklaven mit ihrem Geld, Festschrift fiir die juristische Fakultat in Giessen, Giessen, 1907, pp. 1-20.
5. The texts are so numerous that individual quotation is unnecessary.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 323
Another form, which occurs less frequently, is “sale to the god as trustee.” An inscription! of 200-199 B.c. on the polygonal wall at Delphi may serve as an example :—
Date. ἐπρίατο ὃ ᾿Απόλλων Date. Apollo the Pythian 6 Πύθιος παρὰ Σωσιβίου bought from Sosibius of Am- ᾿Αμφισσέος ἐπ᾽ ἐλευθερίαι phissa, for freedom, a female σῶμ[α] 3 γυναικεῖον, & ὄνομα slave,? whose name is Nicaea, Νίκαια, τὸ γένος Ῥωμαίαν, τιμᾶς | by race a Roman, with a price ἀργυρίου μνᾶν τριῶν καὶ of three minae of silver and a ἡμιμναίουι προαποδότας 8 κατὰ | half-mina. Former seller? ac- τὸν νόμον Evpvacros cording to the law: Eumnastus ᾿Αμφισσεύς. τὰν τιμὰν of Amphissa. The ῤγίοθ he ἀπέχει. τὰν δὲ ὠνὰν ‘| hath received. The purchase,® ἐπίστευσε Νίκαια τῶι however, Nicaea hath com- ᾿Απόλλωνι ἐπ᾽ ἐλευθερίαι. mitted 6 unto Apollo, for free- dom.
Names of witnesses, etc., follow.
St. Paul is alluding to the custom referred to in these records when he speaks of our being made free by Christ. By nature we are slaves of sin,’ of men,® of death®; the Jew is furthermore a slave of the law,!° the heathen a slave of his gods." We become free men by the fact that Christ buys us. And He has done so :—
“ Ye were bought with a price,”
1 Dittenberger, Sylloge,? No. 845.
2 For σῶμα = “‘ slave”’ see above, p. 165, ἢ. 2; also ἢ. 7 below.
8 [προαποδότης, ‘‘ previous vendor’ (Liddell and Scott,* 1901, wrongly “previous traitor”; but see Addenda), in inscriptions and papyri=zpomwanris ; often coupled with βεβαιωτήρ, ‘surety.’ Sosibius had bought Nicaea of Eumnastus, who thus, became the warrantor of Sosibius’ rightful ownership. TR] :
‘ For this ἀπέχει see p. 110 ff. above.
5 Janell, Ausgewahlite Inschriften, p. 107, wrongly translates "" purchase money.”
® On this trusteeship cf. Josef Partsch { 1925, Griechische Biirgschaftsvecht I, Leipzig, 1911, Ὁ. 362 f.
7 Rom. vi. 17, 20, 6,19; Titusiii.3. The passage in Rom. vi. 6, “ that the body of sin might be destroyed,” is ambiguous, since ‘‘ body ”’ (σῶμα) may also mean ‘slave’; similarly in Rom. viii. 23, ἀπολύτρωσις τοῦ σώματος.
8 x Cor. vii. 23. : ® Rom. viii. 20 f.
10 Gal, iv. 1-7, v. I.
11 Gal, iv. 8, 9.
324 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
says St. Paul in two places,! using the very formula of the records, “ with a price.” ? Again,
“ For freedom did Christ set us free,? . . . ye were called for freedom ”’ 4
—in these words of St. Paul we have literally the other formula of the records.®
In numerous records of manumission the nature of the newly obtained liberty is illustrated by the enfranchised person’s being expressly allowed henceforth to
“do the things that he will.’’ ὁ
St. Paul, therefore, is referring to the danger of a relapse
1 1 Cor. vi. 20, vii. 23, τιμῆς ἠγοράσθητε. [ἀγοράζειν is used of the purchase of slaves in the will of Attalus III., 133 8.c., Dittenberger, Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae, No. 33823. For τιμή, “ price,” in the sale of a slave, cf. also τ Clem. lv. 2.7] The repetition of this brief but expressive and exceedingly popular saying leads us to imagine that it was a favourite watch- word also in the apostle’s spoken sermons. Cf. also Gal. iv. 5, ‘‘ to redeem them that were under the law” (ἐξαγοράσῃ).
2 τιμῆς (τιμᾶς) is quite a stereotyped expression in the records, of course with the addition of a definite sum. But τιμῆς can also be used absolutely, as shown by the great document containing royal ordinances of Euergetes II., 118 B.c., The Tebtunis Papyri, No. 5186» 194 20. Cf. the editorial note p. 50 f. The Vulgate pretio magno and Luther’s translation “dearly bought’ can hardly be right. St. Paul is not emphasising the amount of the price, but the fact that the redemption has taken place. Cf. Lietzmann on i Cor. vii. 23: he translates quite justifiably ‘‘ bought for ready money.”’ See also Wilcken on the Gradenwitz Papyrus No. 1 (Griechische Papyri der Sammlung Graden- witz, edited by Gerhard Plaumann, Heidelberg, 1914, p. 14).
8 Gal. v. 1, τῇ ἐλευθερίᾳ ἡ ἡμᾶς Χριστὸς ἠλευθέρωσεν.
4 Gal. ν. 13, ἐπ᾽ ἐλευθερίᾳ ἐκλήθητε. :
5 én’ ἐλευθερίᾳ, cf. Curtius, pp. 17, 32. The formula is common at Delphi, Naupactus, and Tithora. Rensch, p. 100, refers to G. Foucart, De libertorum condicione apud Athenienses, Lutetiae Parisiorum, 1896, p. 14. How very much the formula was alive in the popular consciousness is shown by a letter (Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 1141e,¢, Alexandria, 17th year of Augustus) to which my attention was called by Schubart (letter, Steglitz, 31 July, 1909). It is a remarkable letter, extremely valuable for the N.T., and was written by a freedman apparently to his patron: ὡς δοῦλος ἐπ᾽ ἐλευθερίᾳ θέλει ἀρέσαι [501]. τῷ κυρίῳ, cf. 1 Cor. vii. 32: πῶς ἀρέσῃ τῷ κυρίῳ], οὕτω κἀγὼ τὴν φιλίαν σου θέλων ἄμεμπτον ἐματὸν""ς ἐτήρησα (cf. 1 Thess. v. 23, ἀμέμπτως τηρηθείη], “as a slave for (the sake of) freedom desires to please (his lord), so have I also, desiring thy friendship, kept myself blameless.”
8 ποιῶν 6 xa θέλῃ, cf. Curtius, pp. 17, 39, and especially Mitteis, Reichsrecht und Volksrecht, p. 390. The ᾧ θέλει in τ Cor. vii. 39 originated probably i in the formularies of bills of divorcement; see the material collected in Blau, Die judische Ehescheidung, 2. Teil, p. 20 ff. (35. Jahresbericht der Landesrabbiner- schule in Budapest, Budapest, 1912).
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 325
into servitude when he points to the possible result of the conflict between flesh and spirit with these words 1 :—
“that ye may not do the things that ye would.”
Numerous manumissions, again, expressly forbid, some- times under heavy penalties, that the enfranchised shall ever “ be made a slave”? again. We now see how wicked is the intention of those 3
“who . . . spy out our liberty, which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage.”
And we understand warnings like this 4 in the letters :—
‘For freedom did Christ set us free: stand fast there- fore, and be not entangled again in a yoke of bondage,”
and the still more moving exhortation 5 :—
“Ye were bought with a price, become not slaves of men.”
Christians cannot become slaves of men because they have become “ slaves of Christ ”’ ὁ by purchase, and have entered
1 Gal. ν. 17, iva μὴ ἃ ἐὰν θέλητε ταῦτα ποιῆτε. Note the context; ‘ under the law ’”’ (v. 18) also points to slavery.
2 καταδουλίζειν or -εσθαι, and similar formulae, cf. Curtius, p. 43. The prohibition of re-enslavement was hard to kill. It was known to St. John Chrysostom (p. 327 below); it goes over into medieval Christian law, and is found, for instance, in a formulary of manumission of the Byzantine period (published by Giannino Ferrari, Formulari Notarili inediti dell’ Eta Bizantina, Estratto dal Bullettino dell’ Istituto Storico Italiano n. 33, Roma, 1912, Pp. 24); similarly, under pain of the curses of the 318 Fathers of Nicaea, anathema and heavy fines, in the Codex Vaticanus Palatinus Graecus No. 367 (a formulary of the 8th [?] cent. a.p.; Calderini, p. 448f.); and even in a decree of Frederick the Great: ‘‘ With regard unto this present case I call to mind how that His late Majesty my Father hath many years since decreed that, when a born serf hath served his country for a considerable time in the wars, the same shall on his dismissal, provided he hath established himself in a.town as a burgess, in addition receive his freedom without payment of any redemption-money therefor to his former lord, nor shall he again be able to be reclaimed by the latter to the slavery of serfdom’ (Gustav Mendelssohn Bartholdy, Der Kénig Friedrich d. Gr. in seinen Briefen und Erlassen, Ebenhausen, 1912, p. 264). ὰ
3 Gal. ii. 4, κατασκοπῆσαι τὴν ἐλευθερίαν ἡμῶν ἣν ἔχομεν ἐν Χριστῷ ᾿]ησοῦ, ἵνα ἡμᾶς καταδουλώσουσιν.
4 Gal. ν. 1.
5 1 Cor. vii.23. The allusion is to moral slavery to human lusts and desires. Christians should be slaves of the brethren.
6 The expression δοῦλος Χριστοῦ is so common in St. Paul that there is no need to give instances. It is not a consequence of the metaphor of manu- mission, but older; it suggested the metaphor, however, and fits in admirably with it.
326 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
into the “slavery of God” or “ of righteousness.‘ ’’ But, as in every other case of purchase by a god, the slave of Christ is at the same time free: indeed, he is “ the Lord’s (i.e. Christ’s) freedman,”’ 2 even when in the outward meaning of the word he is the slave of a human lord. When, further, in numerous documents the pious obligation of παραμονή, or remaining in the household of his former lord, is imposed upon the enfranchised slave 3 :
“let him remain with N.N.” (his former master),
or when we hear occasionally * :—
“let Cintus abide with Euphronius . . . behaving decently,”
we are reminded of expressions in St. Paul, e.g. “let him abide with God,” ὅ
and especially of. this one :—
“that which is decent, and attending upon the Lord without distraction.’ 6
If this last example is not fully parallel to the pagan formulae because the reference in St. Paul is to the new master, it corresponds nevertheless to the Jewish formulae of manu-
”
1 Rom. vi. 22, 18. The ἀπό, ‘‘ from,’ used in these two passages (and in Rom. viii. 2, 21) after ἐλευθερόω is also a technical use of language; e.g. in the documents of manumission in Heuzey and Daumet, Missions archéologiques de Macédoine, Paris, 1876, p. 432 ff., we have ἀπελευθερωθέντος ἀπὸ e.g. Στράτωνος (the master at the time of manumission).
3 ἀπελεύθερος κυρίου, τ Cor. vii. 22. So also Curtius, p. 24, is of opinion that the expression “" freedman of the god Aesculapius” (libertus numinis Aes- culapit) in a Latin inscription possibly originated in a sacred manumission. On St. Paul’s expression see more below, p. 382.
3 παραμεινάτω and similar formulae, cf. Curtius, p. 39 f.; Mitteis, Reichsvecht und Volksrecht, p. 386 {.; Rensch, p. 107 ff. A good example is the inscription from, Delphi, 173-2 B.c., Dittenberger, Sylloge,? No. 850, παραμεινάτω “δὲ παρὰ ᾿Αμύνταν Σωτήριχος ἔτη ὀκτὼ ἀνεγκλήτως, “ but let Soterichus abide with Amyntas eight years, blamelessly.”
4 Inscriptions recueillies ἃ Delphes, publiées par C. Wescher, P. Foucart, Paris, 1863, p. 65, No. 66, παραμεινάτω [δὲ] Κίντος παρὰ Εὐφρόνιον. . . εὐσχημονίζων.
δ Cor. vii. 24 (ἴῃ close proximity to the principal passage, “ ye were bought with a price’), μενέτω παρὰ θεῷ.
® x Cor. vii. 35 (cf. also “ blamelessly ” in the inscription quoted in note 3 above), τὸ εὔσχημον καὶ εὐπάρεδρον τῷ κυρίῳ ἀπερισπάστως.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 327
mission from Panticapaeum,! which lay on the enfranchised slave the obligation to be loyal to the synagogue.?
These parallels do not exhaust the cases in which the apostle took his stand on this custom of the ancient world. All that St. Paul and St. John 3 have to say about freedom has this background; but, most important of all, the fre- quently misunderstood conception of redemption,‘ i.e. buying- off and hence deliverance (from sin, the law, etc.), belongs, as St. Chrysostom knew and pointed out,® to the same complex of. ideas. An inscription of Cos, already referred to, uses this very word—a rare one—to describe sacral manumission.®
St. Paul’s predilection for this whole group of images would be most beautifully accounted for if we knew him to have been previously acquainted with the Greek form of our Lord’s deeply significant saying about the vansom.? And we have no reason to doubt that he was. But when anybody heard the Greek word λύτρον, ‘‘ ransom,” in the first century, it was natural for him to think of the purchase-money for manumitting slaves. Three documents ® from Oxyrhynchus
1 Page 321 above.
2 On the technical terms there used cf. p. 102 above.
8 Cf. especially John viii. 36, ‘if the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed,”’ a beautiful saying, quite in the character of St. Paul. The word ἐλευθερόω, which is here used, is found in innumerable documents of manu- mission, and in the Epistle of Aristeas 27 and 37.—The metaphor has been taken up also by other apostles, and in some cases further elaborated.
4 ἀπολύτρωσις. This rare word occurs seven times in St. Paul! Cf. also Epistle of Aristeas 12 and 33.
5 On Romans iii. 24, καὶ ody ἁπλῶς εἶπε λυτρώσεως, ἀλλ᾽ ἀπολυτρώσεως, ὡς μηκέτι ἡμᾶς ἐπανελθεῖν πάλιν ἐπὶ τὴν αὐτὴν δουλείαν, ‘and he said not simply ‘ransoming ’ (lytrosts) but ‘ransoming away’ (apolytrosis), so that we come not again into the same slavery ” (cf. R.C. Trench, Synonyms of the New Testa- ment, 7th ed., London, 1871, p. 273). With this sentence from St. Chrysostom cf. the provisions in the records, as mentioned above, against reducing the man to slavery again. In Theophylact, a late writer, we find the old apostolic metaphor already varnished over (Trench, p. 274). Much material is given by Joseph Wirtz, Die Lehre von dey Apolytrosis. Untersucht nach den heiligen Schriften und den griechischen Schriftstellern bis auf Origenes einschliesslich, Trier, 1906. Later ecclesiastical speculation generally inclined to the view that redemption from the slavery of Satan was meant.
8 Paton and Hicks, No. 29 (=Herzog, p. 39f.). Itis called first ἀπελευθέρωσις, and then ἀπολύτρωσις : those who perform the ἀπελευθέρωσις are not to make formal record of the ἀπολύτρωσις until the priests have reported that the necessary sacrifice has been made. See ἢ. 321, n. 4.
7 Mark x. 45 = Matt. xx. 28, λύτρον ἀντὶ πολλῶν, “ a ransom for many.”
8 x Tim. ii. 6 certainly sounds like an echo.
9 The Oxyrhynchus Papyri Nos. 48, 49, and 722.
328 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
relating to manumissions in the years 86, 100, and gI or 107 A.D. make use of the word. ‘‘ Under Zeus, Ge (= Earth), Helios (= Sun) for a ransom,” is the phrase used in the first two documents, and it is not impossible that all three adum- brate traces of sacral manumission.?
I refrain from entering into a criticism here of the remark- able obscurations and complications which this whole circle of ancient popular metaphors has undergone at the hands of modern dogmatic exegesis. I would rather point out that St. Paul, in expanding and adapting to the Greek world? the Master’s old saying about ransom, was admirably meeting the requirements and the intellectual capacity of the lower classes. For the poor saints of Corinth, among whom there
1 ὑπὸ Δία Γῆν Ἥλιον ἐπὶ λύτροις. The plural λύτρα is most usual. The singular λύτρον for a slave’s redemption-monecy is found, however, several times (to- gether with the plural λύτρα) in inscriptions from Thessaly, cf. Rensch, p. ror f. —On λύτρον (λύτρα) cf. also Mitteis, Reichsvecht und Volksrecht, Ὁ. 388, and Steinleitner, Die Beicht, pp. 36, 37 f., 59, 111. I give here only one example, a remarkable inscription on a votive relief from Kéres (Keures) near Koula in Asia Minor (Fig. 60), printed in Buresch, Aus Lydien, p. 197: Γαλλικῷ ᾿Ασκληπιὰς κώμης Κερυζέων παιδίσχη Aroyévov λύτρον, “ΤῸ Gallicus [= the god Men], Asclepias of the village of Ceryza, maidservant [cf. p. 200, n. 7 above] of Liogenes (Diogenes ?), presents this ransom.”” The word here probably means that Asclepias was releasing herself from a vow. Wiegand, who published the first picture of the stone in the Athenische Mitteilungen, 1904, p. 318, informed me (postcard, Miletus, c. 26 May, 1908) that the original now belongs to the collection of the Lyceum Hosianum at Braunsberg. To the kindness of a venerable colleague at Braunsberg, W. Weissbrodt (now alas! no more), who actually offered to send me the stone for inspection at Berlin, I owe the photograph (received 13 Feb. 1910) from which Fig. 60 has been made. By it Buresch’s reading required some correction. [W. M. Calder, Classical Review 38 (Feb.-March, 1924), p. 30, remarks that the inscription had been correctly transcribed by W. H. Buckler, Annual of the British School at Athens 1914-16, p. 181 ff., who explains Γαλλικώ as a feminine proper name, like Καλλιστώ, “]ερώ, etc., and clears away an unwarranted epithet of the god Men. Thus : Γαλλικὼ ᾿Ασκληπίας [= ᾿Ασκληπείας] κώμης Κερυζέων πα(ι)δίσχη (Δ)ιογένου λύτρον,“ Galliko, female slave of the Asklepian village of the Keryzeis, (dedicates this as) ransom of Diogenes.”  TR.]
2 Οἱ. Mitteis, Hermes, 34 (1899) p. 104, and U. Wilcken’ 5 remark there on a Christian document of manumission of the year 354 A.D. containing the formula “‘ free under earth and heaven according to [xar’, not καί the service due to God the compassionate.”
3 It is a mattcr of great importance how gospel conceptions were expanded and adapted to the world, when we try to understand Christianity as a world- religion. The most important example is the expansion of the originally Palestinian word “ the Christ ’’ (= the Messiah) into “ Christ ’’ as the world- wide name of God. Further details will be found in a small work-by me, Die Urgeschichte des Christentums im Lichte der Sprachforschung, Tibingen, 1910.
ef
Fic. 60.—Lytyvon (‘‘ransom’’) Inscription from Ké6res (Keures), near Koula, in Asia Minor. Imperial Period. Now in the Lyceum Hosianum at Braunsberg. Photograph kindly obtained by the late W. Weissbrodt.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 329
were certainly some slaves,! he could not have found a more popular illustration ? of the past and present work of the Lord. A Christian slave of Corinth going up the path to the Acrocorinthus about Eastertide, when St. Paul’s letter arrived,® would see towards the north-west the snowy peak of Parnassus rising clearer and clearer before him, and every- one knew that within the circuit of that commanding summit lay the shrines at which Apollo or Serapis or Asclepius the Healer bought slaves with a price, for freedom. Then in the evening assembly was read the letter lately received from Ephesus, and straightway the new Healer was present in spirit with His worshippers, giving them freedom from another slavery, redeeming with a price .the bondmen of sin and the law—and that price no pious fiction, first received by Him out of the hard-earned denarii of the slave, but paid by Himself with the redemption-money of His daily new self-sacrifice, rousing up for freedom those who languished in slavery.
It is an extremely remarkable fact that St. Paul, who was so strongly influenced by the idea and the formulae of manu- mission as practised in antiquity, should have himself found a place afterwards in the formularies of manumission of the Christian period. A Byzantine formulary that we have already had occasion to mention‘ adorns itself with the words 5:
“Since, however, the most mighty-voiced Paul cries clearly, ‘ there is no bond, ‘but free,’ behold, thee also, my household-servant bought with money, ... thee will I make free from this day forth.”
Moreover the other Christian book of formularies * which we have mentioned cites the apostle as an authority :
1 Cf. 1 Cor. vii. 21 and the various names of slaves in 1 Cor.
2 Used occasionally also by Epictetus, Diatribae (Schenkl) I. 195, ἐμὲ ὁ Ζεὺς ἐλεύθερον ἀφῆκεν (cf. P. Feine, Theologie des N.T.,? Leipzig, 1911, p. 489).
3 The assumption is rendered probable by 1 Cor. xvi. 8 and v. 7, 8.
4 Ῥ, 325, ἢ. 2 above.
δ Ferrari, p. 23: ἐπεὶ δὲ 6 μεγαλοφωνώτατος Παῦλος διαφανῶς Bog “᾿ οὐκ ἔστι δοῦλος ἀλλὰ ἐλεύθερος " [Gal. iii. 28 is meant], ἰδοὺ καὶ σὲ τὸν ἀργυρώνητόν μου οἰκέτην... ἐλευθεριῶ σε ἀπὸ τὴν σήμερον ἡμέραν.
6 Calderini, p. 448 £. (cf. p. 320, n. 3 above): ὡς φησὶν 6 ἀπόστολος" ἀδελφοὺς Χριστὸς ἡμᾶς ἐξηγόρασεν (Gal. iii. 13] τῷ ταμίῳ αὐτοῦ [probably a corruption of τιμίῳ αὐτοῦ αἵματι: cf. τ Peter i. 19], τοίνυν καὶ σὺ ἔσοι ἀπὸ τοῦ viv ἐλεύθερος, παντελεύθερος, Ρωμαῖος πολίτης,
330 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
“ As saith the apostle, Christ hath redeemed us brethren with His precious (blood), therefore also be thou from now free, free altogether, a Roman citizen. . . ἢ
This formulary completes the circle yet more surely; the Master Himself as the great Liberator imparts to the act its real consecration: the text not only mentions Christ in this quotation, but gives Him quite a great position in the first part, such as had once, under the same sky, belonged to Zeus, Ge, and Helios.1
The question how this ancient mnetaphior of St. Paul’s from the practice of manumission is to be interpreted in detail, I will merely mention. The chief point to examine is whether St. Paul regards redemption through Christ merely as a single summary act performed once for all in the past,? or (which seems to me probable) also as an act of liberation experienced anew, in each single case of conversion, by every person newly incorporated in Christ. Further it may be asked whether the rice is a necessary link in the chain of thought, or merely a pictorial detail of no ulterior significance. It is clear from 1 Peter i. 18, το that at a very early period the price was understood to be the Blood of Christ. The union of the idea of manumission‘ with the idea of sacrifice was made easier for the ancient Christians by the fact that. sacral manumission, ¢.g. at Cos, was not complete without , sacrifice. Finally should be pointed out the affinity between the idea of redemption (manumission) and the idea of for- giveness (remission) of our trespasses which was established for the ancients by the legal procedure they were accustomed to. In cases of non-payment of a money debt the system ‘of personal execution ὅ allowed not only arrest but even
slavery for debt.® The series of Gospel and Primitive Christian metaphors
1 The formula ὑπὸ Ata, Γῆν, Ἥλιον occurs fairly frequently; cf. p. 328, n. I, 2 above.
2 Cf. Gal. iii. 13.
5. Cf. redemption in Christ, Col.i.14; Eph.i.7; Rom. iii. 24 (like manumissio in ecclesia, p. 322, n. 3 above).
4 Cf. the inscription, p. 321, ἢ. 4 above.
5 Cf. p. 270 above.
° Cf. Τῷ, Mitteis, Reichsvecht und Volksvecht, pp. 358f., 445 ff., and his observation on the Reinach Papyrus No. 7 (see p. 270, n. 1 above),
Fic. 61.—Note of Hand for 100 Silver Drachmae, Ist cent. A.D. Papyrus from the Fayim. Now in the Berlin Museum. By permission of the Directors of the State Museums.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 331
to which we have thus alluded—metaphors connected with debt and forgiveness (or vemission)—are likewise taken from the legal practice of antiquity, and might receive many an illustration from the new texts. I have pointed out else- where that the word ὀφειλη, “‘ debt,” supposed to be peculiar to the New Testament, is quite current in the papyrit So too there are plenty of original documents on papyrus to teach us the nature of an ancient acknowledgment of debt. A large number of ancient notes of hand have been published among the Berliner Griechische Urkunden, and probably every other collection of papyri contains some specimens. A stereotyped formula in these documents is the promise to pay back the borrowed money, ‘I will repay’? ; and they all are in the debtor’s own hand,‘ or, if he could not write, in the handwriting of another acting for him with the express remark, “1 have written for. him.’’ Thus, for instance, in a very vulgar note of hand for 100 silver drachmae written in the Fayiim ὅ in the first century A.D. for two people who could not write by one Papus, who was himself not much of a writer, we have (Figure 61 δ) :—
[as καὶ ἀϊἸποδόσωμεμϑ — — .... Which we will also repay ... . beside? any other that we may owe....I Papus wrote for him [sic ; at should be them], who is not aitlwi®!’ ἀγραμμάτου. able to write.
[. - - - χωρὶς ἄλλων ὧν ὀφίλοε[. . 5°
-- —. Πάπος ἔγραψα ὑ[πὲρ
It now becomes clear that St. Paul, who had playfully given the Philippians a sort of receipt,® is in the letter to
1 Neue Bibelstudien, p. 48; Bible Studies, p. 221.
2 Cf. Mitteis, Reichsrecht und Volksrecht, pp. 484, 493f.; Gradenwitz, Einfihrung, I. p. 109 ff. One technical expression, among others, for a memorandum of debt is the word χειρόγραφον, ‘ hand-writing,” “ a writing by hand,” which is also used for other private contracts.
3 Generally ἀποδώσω.
4 Hence the technical name, “ hand-writing,” ‘‘ writing by hand” [cf. English “‘ note of hand ’’]. See Neue Bibelstudien, p.67; Bible Studies, p. 247.
5 Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 664. Wilcken recommends me, as a better example, the Oxyrhynchus Papyrus No. 269 (57 A.D°).
6 T am indebted for the photograph to the kindness of W. Schubart.
7 Or “ apart from ” (W. H. P. Hatch, letter, New York, 2 Dec., 1911).
8 Phil. iv. 18; cf. p. 112 above.
332 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Philemon (18 f.) humorously writing him a sort of acknow- ledgment of debt 3 :—
εἰ δέ τι ἠδίκησέν σε ἢ ὀφεί. “Tf he hath wronged thee or oweth thee ought, put that ae ae , , « | on mine account.? I Paul have Παῦλος ἔγραψα τῇ ἐμῇ χειρί, ©Y | written it with mine own hand, ἀποτίσω.8 I will repay it.”
Ν λει, τοῦτο ἐμοὶ éAAdya.2 ἐγὼ
The parallelism between the legal formulae and the letters of St. Paul becomes still clearer when we observe that the ancient note of hand generally took the form of a Jettey acknowledging the debt.4
Some ancient customs connected with the law of debt must be at the root of the celebrated passage in Col. ii. 14 where the technical expression ‘‘ handwriting ’’ (= bond) is employed in a religious sense and brought into a remarkable connexion with the cross. Christ, says the apostle, has forgiven us all the debts incurred by our trespasses. Then, with a piling-up of cognate metaphors,® the writer continues :—
ἐξαλείψας τὸ Kal’ ἡμῶν χει- “Having blotted out the handwriting . . . that was
Ld x oN > 3
Oypamov ... Καὶ αὐτό ω] KEY εκ 5 ἰὼ ψι λώ Ρ . _. | against us...and He hath τοῦ μέσου, προσηλώσας αὐτὸ τῷ | taken it out of the way, nailing σταυρῳ. it to the cross,”
“ The handwriting nailed to the cross ’’—does that simply
1 Eger, Rechtsgeschichtliches zum N.T., p. 44, shows that legally this is not a case of agency or guarantee (Hugo Grotius and Schraderus had considered it, from the point of view of Roman law, a constitutum debiti alien), but a private ‘‘ intercession,” a releasing adoption of the debt such that the old debtor is acquitted of his debt and another takes his place as debtor [something of the kind was the idea before me in previous editions]. Hans Reichel, Neue Zircher Zeitung, No. 1731, 9 Nov., 1919, considers it a kind of novation (replacement of an existing debt by a new one, resting on a new basis).
? On this technical word, see p. 84 above. ἐλλόγα has arisen by confusion of the -ἂν and -eiv types of inflexion (Blass-Debrunner, ὃ 90, 'p. 50).
* 3 On this word, which is much stronger than ἀποδώσω, cf. Gradenwitz, Einfihrung, I. p. 85; also Moulton and Milligan, The Expositor, August 1908, p. 191 f.
4 Eger is quite right in pointing out (p. 45) that, by adding “ albeit I do not say to thee how thou owest unto me even thine own self besides,’’ Paul does away with the legal and business character of what he has just written.
_ 5 Such piled-up metaphors, not admirable in point of style, but not ineffective in a popular sermon, often occur in St, Paul. Cf, my Paulus, p. 103, ΞΡ. 138; St. Paul, pp. 153 f., 2p, 176,
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 5333
mean “‘ it is crucified,” 1.6. dead, ineffective? That would be possible. But probably the image is a much livelier one!: there must be an allusion to some custom which is not yet known to us.2. If we are unable to point to the source of “the bond nailed to the cross,” it may at least be allowed in passing to refer to “‘ the cross on the bond.’ We have learnt from the new texts that it was generally customary to cancel a bond (or other document) by crossing it out with the Greek cross-letter Chi (X).3 In the splendid Florentine papyrus,‘
1 It was at least a right instinct for the technical something that led many commentators to conjecture that bonds were cancelled in antiquity by perfora- tion with a nail. As far as I know, nail perforations have been found hitherto only on inscribed leaden rolls, e.g. the leaden tablet from Hadrumetum (Bzbel- studien, frontispiece and p. 26; not given in Bible Studies); but the nails were not meant to annul the text. [On the use of nails in magic cf. Richard Wiinsch, Antikes Zaubergerat aus Pergamon, Jahrbuch des Kaiserlich Deut- schen Archdologischen Instituts, Erganzungsheft 6, Berlin, 1905, p. 43 f.; and Franz Boll, Griechischer Liebeszauber aus Agypten, Sitzungsberichte der Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschaften, Heidelberg, 1910, p. 3 f.] Moreover, as Erich Haupt very rightly points out in his note on the passage (Meyer’s Kommentar, 8/9°-’., Géttingen, 1902, p. 96), the main point with St. Paul is not the nailing in itself, but the nailing to the cross.
2 A. H. Sayce, The Nation, Supplement, Nov. 12, 1910, p. 296, thinks that a parallel may be produced : ‘‘ Slips of wood on which the household accounts were kept have been found in Theban tombs of the second century, with the previous week’s accounts similarly ‘ blotted out.’ The holes in the slips suggest that they may have been suspended on pegs or nails when not wanted for use, and so explain the reference to ‘nailing to the cross’ (Col. ii. 14), to which Professor Deissmann is unable to find a parallel.’’ Merely from this hint I am not able to judge the nature of the facts; but at present the parallel is not very convincing to me. For the rest cf. the detailed investigation by Franz Josef Délger, Die Sonne dev Gevechtigkeit und dey Schwarze, Minster i. W., 1918 (Liturgiegeschichtliche Forschungen, Part 2), p. 129 ff. [Professor Sayce, writing on 16 and 18 July, 1923, kindly stated that the rectangular tablets of various sizes, all in Greek, of the 2nd cent. a.b., were in his own collection of Egyptian antiquities. He had published one or two many years ago, but could not remember where. He thought there might be similar tablets or ‘‘ boards ” in the British Museum; but Sir F. G. Kenyon, writing on 1 Aug., 1923; knew nothing of them, and could only refer to perforated wooden tablets for school use, e.g. one containing lines from the Hecate of Callimachus, in the Rainer collection at Vienna, and a grammatical tablet, British Museum,
Add. MS. 37516. TR.] 3 A correspondent, Dr. R. Kluge (Charlottenburg, 9 June, 1910), suggested
that a connexion between cross (substantive) and cyoss out was only possible in German. But that is not so [not to mention other modern languages, _such as English: ¢.g., ‘“‘his (the tailor’s) book uncross’d,’’ Shakespeare, Cymbeline 111. iii. 26. Tr.] The letter Chi was identified with the shape of the cross in antiquity, and plays a great part in graphic representations. 4 No. 61e5¢.; p. 269 f. above.
334 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
of the year 85 A.D., of which use has been made before (Figure 50), the governor of Egypt gives this order in the course of a trial :—
‘Let the handwriting be crossed out.” ὦ
The same technical word, χιάξω, “ T cross out,”’ occurs in other similar contexts in papyri of New Testament age,? but the Florentine passage is especially valuable as showing that the custom of crossing out (which has endured down to our own day) was not a mere private one, but also official. We have moreover recovered the originals of a number of “ crossed- out’? 10.0.5: there are several at Berlin,t some at Heidelberg,’ and in other collections. The subject is perhaps not without some bearing on the origin of later allegorical and mystical trifling with the cross-letter Chi among Christians.
Starting once more from the 1.0.1]. formulae of the Epistle to Philemon we can touch on yet another conception of Hellenistic law which was early applied - metaphorically within the Christian range of religious ideas, viz. the con- ception of agency. Here also the new texts have opened up quite new views.
“Roman law, as is generally and according to the sources in the Corpus Juris rightly taught, gave on principle no recognition to direct agency, 1.6. acting in the name and at the expense of the principal, in whose person arise the rights and duties resulting from the business. Certain exceptions, especially direct agency in the acquisition of property, were
1 καὶ éx[élAevce τὸ χειρ[ὄγραφον χιασθῆναι : the last two lines in the facsimile (Fig. 50). ᾿
2 Grenfell and Hunt, The Oxyrhynchus Papyri, Part II. p. 243, quote it as occurring in Nos. 36215 (75 A.D.), 363g (77-79 A.D.); they admit it in a restored reading, No. 266, (96 A.D.). ι
8 Of course the simple Chi is often somewhat altered, and no doubt other forms of erasure will be discovered.
4 Berliner Griechische Urkunden, Nos. 101 (114 A.D.), 272 (138-139 A.D.), 179 (¢. Antoninus Pius). This last has been reproduced in facsimile and explained by Gradenwitz, Einfihrung in die Papyruskunde, I. frontispiece and p. 95 ff. [but see Wilcken, Deutsche Lit.-Ztg. 21 (1900) col. 2469]. It exhibits a whole network of Chi-strokes, like the Heidelberg specimens (see next note) and the London Papyrus No. 336.
5 Nos. 8c, and 26, unpublished.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 335
gradually acknowledged, ‘ but the most important depart- ment of private law, that of obligatory contracts, remained entirely closed to direct agency.’’’ In these words Leopold Wenger 1! sketched what was known of agency in antiquity before the papyri came to enlighten us. Afterwards he himself in a very informing monograph on Die Stellvertretung im Rechte der Papyri ? worked up the material so far accessible in the newly discovered legal documents of Hellenistic and Roman Egypt, explaining from the original records, which are sometimes wonderfully well preserved, the facts concerning agency in public law, agency in actions, and agency in private law. It follows that the idea of agency must certainly have been one of the best-known elements of popular law in ‘Egypt, and from many other analogies we may perhaps assume that Egypt, whose bundles of documents have been re-discovered, is here also only the paradigm for the other portions of the former Empire of Alexander, whose records, so far as they relate to actions and private law, have almost entirely disappeared.
The supposition is perhaps confirmed by the use which St. Paul, the man of Asia Minor, makes of the idea of agency, which had certainly become dear to him also through his Jewish education.? The wish expressed (Philemon 13) that Onesimus, the slave who has run away from his master Philemon at Colossae, and is now with St. Paul, might serve the apostle in his captivity as the agent * of Philemon, would be, if there is really a legal allusion here at all, explainable even on Roman principles—the slave represents his master.® But when St. Paul, after speaking of his convert Onesimus in verse 10 as his child, goes on to put himself in his place financially in terms of the adoption of a debt, this is best
1 Papyrusforschung und Rechtswissenschaft, Graz, 1903, p. 26f. At the end he is citing Josef Hupka, Die Vollmacht, Leipzig, 1900, p. 7.
2 Leipzig, 1906.
® On agency in the religious contemplation and speculation of Judaism cf. Ferdinand Weber, Jiidische Theologie auf Grund des Talmud und verwandter Schriften,? pp. 292 ff., 326 ff., 361. Here again one can see how closely the “ Semitic ’’ may come in contact with the Hellenistic in matters of culture.
4 That is the meaning of ὑπὲρ σοῦ in Philemon 13, just as inso many papyri the scribe representing an illiterate debtor writes ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ, ‘for him,” ‘‘ as his agent,” ¢.g. p. 166, n. 6 above, letter 6, and p. 331.
5 Cf. Wenger, Die Stellvertretung, p. 157 #.
336 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
understood as a father’s agency for his son, according to the Greek law and Hellenistic law of the papyri.?
Altogether, therefore, the idea of agency, which is employed in several important statements of St. Paul about the past and present work of Christ, cannot be regarded as a foreign body: inside Hellenistic Primitive Christianity, but must be reckoned one of the many thoroughly popular means to make things plain which the earliest propaganda adopted. More important than single passages on the vicarious work of Jesus in the past is the general view taken of His vicarious. present activity. This view, hinted at in the gospels,? was probably started by St. Paul ® ; it grew to full maturity and attained classical formulation? in the Johannine writings. Christ is our Paraclete,® 1.6. advocate, our representative in the trial, our intercessor, comforter. Again the new texts help us to understand what a thoroughly popular conception was covered by this primitive and deeply expressive element: of our religious vocabulary. The work of the advocate in the Hellenistic world has been illustrated by. Mitteis,* Graden-
‘witz,? and Wenger® with so many speaking examples,, notably the reports of actual cases, which have lost nothing of their freshness and colour, that it has become simply. tangibly clear.® It should be specially pointed out that the
1 Cf. Wenger, Die Stellvertretung, pp. 169 f., 235.
2 Mark xiii. 11; cf. Matt.x.19f.; Luke xii. 11 f., xxi. 14 f.
8 As it happens, St. Paul has not used the word Paraclete in his letters; but the idea is clearly there in Rom. viii. 26-34.
4 John xiv. 16, 26, xv. 26, xvi. 7; 1 Johnii. 1.
5 A new instance of the use of the word in Greek, which is phonetically remarkable, occurs in a fragment of a mime in the British Museum, No. 1984 (2nd cent. a.D., Fayfiim ?), published by A. Kérte, Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung 6, p. 1 ff., and Plate 1. One of the characters, 4, says: πάτερ “Iwv, od χρῶμαϊί σοι οὔτε κριτῇ [οὔτε] παρακρήτῳ, and is then corrected by A: παρακλήτῳ. (4: “Father Ion, I need thee not, neither as judge [nor] as paracrete.” A: “ Paraclete ! ’’).—I here recall the memory of a promising -young theologian, Berthold Lohr, of Elberfeld, who just before the outbreak of the Great War had begun an extensive work on the concept παράκλητος, and who laid down his life for his country in 1915. The passage quoted from the mime was one of the latest joys in his life as a scholar.
ὁ Reichsrecht und Volksvecht, pp. 150, 189 ff. τ Einfihrung, 1. p..152 ff.
8 Die Stellvertvetung, pp. 123 ff., 150 ff.
® For Asia cf. Dio Chrysostom, Or. 35, 15 (von Arnim, Ὁ. 335 f.).—The popularity of this particular word is perhaps best shown by the fact that it has gone over as a borrowed word (peraklit) into Hebrew and Aramaic. It is used as a name of power in an Abyssinian magical text (W. H. Worrell, Zeitschrift fiir Assyriologie 24, p. 94).
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 337
Pauline formula “ through Christ,’’ so often wrongly ex- plained, but recognised by Adolph Schettler! in its true character and relative unambiguity, is in many passages intelligible only if we start from the thought of the Paraclete.?
Much more might be said about the background of the New Testament figurative language, but I am not aiming here at completeness of statement. I am content to have shown by some examples*® the importance of the whole subject. Perhaps the most necessary investigation still waiting to be made is that relating to the word διαθήκη, which so many scholars translate unhesitatingly ‘‘ cove- nant.’”’ Now as the new texts help us generally to recon- struct Hellenistic family law and the law of inheritance, so in particular our knowledge of Hellenistic wills has been wonderfully increased by a number of originals on stone or papyrus. There is ample material to back me in the state- ment that no one in the Mediterranean world in the first century A.D. would have thought of finding in the word διαθήκη the idea of “covenant.” St. Paul would not, and in fact did not. To St. Paul the word’ meant what it meant in his Gree Old Testament 4, “‘ a unilateral enactment,” in particular ‘‘a will or testament.” This one point concerns more than the merely superficial question whether we are to
1 Die paulinische Formel ‘‘ Durch Christus,” Tubingen, 1907.
3 Cf, p. 121, n. 16 above, and Schettler, p. 28 f.
3 T have given other examples elsewhere already; cf. the notes on υἱοθεσία (adoption), Neue Bibelstudien, p. 66 ἴ., Bible Studies, p. 239; on evictio and arvha, Bibelstudien, p. 100 f., Neue Bibelstudien, p. 56, Bible Studies, pp. 108 f., 183 £., 230 (also Moulton and Milligan, The Expositor, Sept. 1908, p. 280) ; on dyyapevw, B. St., p. 811., B. Studies, p. 861.; ἀξίωμα, B. St., p. 87f., B. Studies, p. 92 £.; γέγραπται, B. St., p. tog f., N. B. St., p. 77 £., B. Studies, pp. 112f., 249f.; δίκαιος, B. St., p. 112 f., B. Studies, p. 115 £. (also Moulton and Milligan, The Expositor, Dec. 1908, p. 565 f.); εἰς τὸ ὄνομα, p. 123 above; ἔντευξις, B. St., pp. 117 £., 143, B. Studies, pp. 121, 146; πράκτωρ, B. St., Ῥ. 152, B. Studies, p. 154; πρεσβύτεροι, B. St., p. 153 ff., N. B. St., p. 60 ff., B. Studies, pp. 154 £., 233 ἴ.; εἰς ἀθέτησιν, N. B. St., p. 55 1.,ὄ Β. Studies, p. 228 f.; ἀκατάγνωστος, N. B. St., p. 28£., B. Studies, p. 200; ἀπόκριμα, N. B. St, p. 85, B. Studies, p. 257 (also Moulton and Milligan, The Expositor, Aug. 1908, p. 187); ἐμμένω, N. B. St., p. 761., B. Studies, Ὁ. 248 ἴ.; τὸ ἐπιβάλλον μέρος, Ν. Β. St., p. 57, B. Studies, p. 230; ἐπίσκοπος, N. B. St., p. 571., Β. Studies, pp. 156, 230f.; πρᾶγμα, N. B. St., p. 60, B. Studies, p. 233; ἐκ συμφώνου, N. B. St., Ῥ-. 82 1., B. Studies, p. 255; τήρησις, N. B. 51., p. 95, Β. Studies, p. 267; χωρίζομαι, N. B. St., p. 67, B. Studies, p. 247. Several new examples are given in Chapters II. and III. of this book. Note also the works of Otto Eger and the new examples in Moulton and Milligan’s “ Vocabulary.”
4 (Jer. xxxi (xxxviii.) 31 ff. TR.]
338 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
write “‘ New Testament ” or ‘ New Covenant ” on the title- page of the sacred volume; it becomes ultimately the great question of all religious history: a religion of grace, or a religion of works? It involves the alternative, was Pauline Christianity Augustinian or Pelagian ? }
g. Closely connected with the lower classes by the ties of popular language and non-literary culture, by the realism of keen-sighted religious imagery, by popular morality and popular law, Primitive Christianity displays moreover in one group of its most characteristic utterances a tone that might be interpreted as one of protest against the upper classes, and which certainly has that effect, although it arose less from conscious political or social antipathies than from the passionate determination of the monotheistic cult of Christ to tolerate no compromises. I mean the strongly pronounced tone of protest against the worship of the Caesar.? In so far as the religious adoration of the sovereign is the crown and summit of the culture of the ruling classes,’
1 See the hints in my little sketch, Die Hellenisierung des semitischen Mono- theismus, Leipzig, 1903, p. 175 [15]. Future investigators will find matter of great importance in Eduard Riggenbach’s ‘‘ Der Begriff der AIAOHKH im Hebraerbrief ” in Theologische Studien Theodor Zahn zum 10 Oktober 1908 dargebracht, Leipzig, 1908, pp. 289-316. Cf. also Moulton and Milligan, The Expositor, Dec. 1908, pp. 563, 565. Frederick Owen Norton’s ‘‘ Lexicograph- icaland Historical Study of 4IA@HKH from the earliest times to the end of the classical period,’’ Chicago, 1908, does not get far enough to deal with the period of the Greek Bible. Since then much valuable work has been done on the problem: Franz Dibelius, Das Abendmahl, Leipzig, 1911, especially Ῥ. 76 ff.; Joh. Behm, Der Begriff διαθήκη. τι N.T., Leipzig, 1912; Ernst Lohmeyer, Diatheke, Leipzig, 1913 (a Berlin University Prize Essay of 1909) ; Mitteis, Grundziige, p. 234 ff.; O. Eger, Zeitschrift f. die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft 18 (1917), p. 98 ff., and Rechtsgeschichtliches p. 31 ff.
2 H. A. A. Kennedy’s “ Apostolic Preaching and Emperor Worship,” The Expositor, April 1909, pp. 289-307, takes a similar view. His article was written before the publication of this book (letter, Toronto, 13 October, 1908), and appeared in the Expositor, April 1909. Cf. also Otto Weinreich, Lyhische Zwiolfgdtter-Reliefs (Sitzungsberichte der Heidelberger Akademie der Wissen- schaften, phil.-hist. Klasse, 1913, 5. Abhandlung), Heidelberg, 1913, pp. 13, 31; the writings of Wilhelm Weber; and especially E. Lohmeyer, Christuskult und Kaiserkult, Tibingen, 1919; fora later period: Erich Becker, ‘‘ Protest gegen den Kaiserkult,” offprint from F. J. Délger’s Konstantin dey Grosse, Rom-Freiburg, 1913. The newly published texts, especially papyri, contain much fresh material. [Cf. article ‘‘Caesarism’’ by Principal James Iverach in vol. iii. of the Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, edited by James Hastings and John A. Selbie, 1911. TR.]
8. Cf. the brief but comprehensive account of emperor worship by U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, “‘ Geschichte der griechischen Religion,” in the
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 339
the Primitive Christian abhorrence of emperor worship does form an upper line of demarcation, and in course of time it unites here and there with those political and social instincts of the oppressed which had long been present in Judaism.
Politically the earliest Christianity was comparatively indifferent,1 not as Christianity, but as a movement among the humble classes, whose lot had undoubtédly been on the whole improved by the Imperium. The fire of national hatred of the foreigner which smouldered in Palestine re- mained practically confined to this area, and seems to have gained no hold among the disciples of Jesus at the outset. Their opponents were none other than His opponents, viz. the leaders of the nation itself, and the expectation of the coming kingdom of God is much more of a polemic against the Scribes and Pharisees than against the Romans.
St. Paul, too, in spite of occasional conflicts with Roman officials on his journeys, had probably in his own person more often experienced the blessings than the burdensome constraint of State organisation. In what was to him personally the most momentous legal affair of his life he asserted his rights as a citizen ? and appealed to the Caesar. He sees no theoretical difficulties in all the small political questions that affect the humble individual: to respect and pray for the powers in authority is as natural to him as the payment of tribute and custom.’ It is no right view of the subject to say that Paul was indifferent to political problems because of his religious expectations of a coming end; if
Jahrbuch des Freien Deutschen Hochstifts, 1904, Frankfurt am Main, p. 23 ff. (cf. Wilcken, Grundztige p. 117). More recent than the works mentioned at Pp. 290 above: H. Heinen, Zur Begriindung des rémischen Kaiserkultes, Klio 11 (1911) p. 129 ff.; P. Riewald, De imperatorum Romanorum cum ceteris dis et comparatione et dequatione (Dissertationes philologicae Halenses, 20, pars 3), Halle, 1912.
1 Heinrich Weinel, in his otherwise excellent work, Die Stellung des Urchris- tentums zum Staat, Tibingen, 1908, exaggerates the political antipathies of the earliest Christianity. ἷ
2 Acts xxii.27. On the whole subject cf. Theodor Mommsen, ‘‘ Die Rechts- verhaltnisse des Apostels Paulus,” Zeitschrift fir die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft, 2 (1901) p. 81 ff. On appealing to Caesar cf. the important remarks of O. Eger, Rechtsgeschichtliches, pp. 20 ff., 24 ff., where new texts bearing on the right of appeal in the Imperial period are made use of.
8 The first book of Wilcken’s Griechische Ostraka, with its evidence of 218 different kinds of dues payable in Egypt, is a splendid commentary on Rom. xiii. 7.
340 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
anything, those expectations were calculated to make him interested in politics. The fact is that political interest and political activity were on the whole remote from the class to which he belonged. The comparatively marked in- difference of St. Paul to politics is not specifically connected with Primitive Christianity, its causes are secular and social.
All the more sensitive, however, was Primitive Christianity in its own most special field, the religious, on which all its passion was concentrated. The deification of the Caesars was an abomination to Christianity from the beginning. It is very probable that this antipathy was inherited by the daughter from monotheistic Judaism.1 In those words of quiet delicacy in which Jesus names both the Caesar and God, we see already the place reserved for God which belongs to Him alone.2- Two generations later the Book of the Revelation, coming from the classical land of emperor - worship, gives most powerful voice to the religious contrast, which by that time was heightened by the political resent- ment of the oppressed. This access of passion would be historically unintelligible were it not for the years that lie between the calm dignity of Jesus and the volcanic ardour of the Apocalypse. With the lapse of time, the religious | antithesis must have been felt more and more acutely until at length imprinted on the Christian conscience in indelible characters.
And so it really was. If it has not been seen before, that is because the literary sources of the Imperial age are par- ticularly deficient on the point. The new texts, however— some of which are themselves direct evidence of the cult of the Caesar—enable us to judge of the feelings aroused by exhibitions of the cult of the sovereign even at the time of St. Paul’s mission in the minds of those who had nothing but their God in Christ and their conscience.
It must not be supposed that St. Paul and his fellow- believers went through the world blindfolded, unaffected by what was then moving the minds of men in great cities. These pages, I think, have already shown by many examples
? Cf. Tacitus, Hist. v. 5, on the Jews: non regibus haec adulatio, non Caesaribus honor. Abundant material on Judaism and the cult of the Caesars in Juster, I. p. 339 ff.
2 Cf. p. 214 above.
Fic. 62.—Original Limestone Plate (sha- vagma) inscribed with the seal of Augustus. Egypt, 5-6 αν. Now in the Berlin Mu- seum. By permission of the Directors of the State Museums.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY _ 341
how much the New Testament is a book of the Imperial age. We may certainly take it for granted that the Christians of the early Imperial period were familiar with the institu- tions and customs that the Empire had brought with it. That they were familiar even with apparently out-of-the-way points is shown, for instance, by the allusion in Rev. xiii. 16 f. to the custom, now known to us from the papyri, of imprinting on deeds of sale and similar documents a stamp which contained the name and regnal year of the Emperor and was called, as in the Revelation, a charagma.1_ To the examples previously given * from Augustus to Trajan there now comes a welcome addition in the form of an imperial stamp affixed to documents ὃ from the Fayim, dated 48 a.p. As a concrete illustration I reproduce * here an actual-size facsimile of one of the original stamps of Augustus (5-6 A.D.), a soft plate of limestone now in the Berlin Museum (Figure 62). The legend, the letters of which are of course reversed, runs :—
L de Καίσαρος In the 35th year of the Emperor γρ(αφεῖον ὃ) Scribe’s chamber (9)
If such superficial details were known among the people, how much more so the deification of the emperor, with its glittering and gorgeous store of the very loftiest terms em- ployed in worship, compelling every monotheistic conscience to most powerful reaction! Such jewels were never intended for mortal brow! And so from out the despised mass of the unknown Many the hard and deformed hands ὅ of the saints in Christ stretch forth and appropriate from the
1 Hiller von Gaertringen (postcard, Westend, 16 May, 1914) referred me to an inscription from Antigonea (Mantinea), after 27 B.c., afterwards discussed by him in Dittenberger, Sylloge? No. 78325, which says of a meritorious citizen: μέχρι τῶν Σεβαστείων εὐπλόησε χαρακτήρων, ‘he made a successful voyage to the August Persons (Augustus and Livia).”” I translate “‘ Persons,’ because clearly an audience at the Imperial Court is referred to—as in the decree of the Byzantines, Ὁ. 378, n. 6 below; that is to say, χαρακτήρ is already being used here in a transferred sense. For a man of that period the transition from Emperor’s stamp to Imperial Person was not very circuitous; the Caesar was present to him even in the chavagma.
2 Neue Bibelstudien, pp. 68-75; Bible Studies, p. 240f.; cf. also Wilcken, Archiv ἢ. Papyrusforschung, 1, p. 76, and J. C. Naber, zb7d. pp. 85 f., 316 ff.
3 Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 748.
« Neue Bibelstudien, p. 71; cf. Bible Studies, p. 243.
5 Cf. p. 246 above.
342 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST -
crown of the Caesars such old and new divine insignia as offered, and deck therewith their Son of God, whose they are, because before He was set over them He had stood beside them; who became poor with the poor, who humbled Him- self with the lowly and humble and had lived submissively in the likeness of a slave, and who after a shameful death on the cross had been raised by God and had received a name which is above al] names.
And that is what we may actually observe. The cult of Christ goes forth into the world of the Mediterranean and soon displays the endeavour to reserve for Christ the words already in use for worship in that world, words that had just been transferred to the deified emperors (or had perhaps even been newly invented in emperor worship).? Thus there arises a polemical parallelism between the cult of the emperor and the cult of Christ, which makes itself felt where ancient words derived by Christianity from the treasury of the Septuagint and the Gospels happen to coincide with solemn concepts of the Imperial cult which sounded the same or similar.
In many cases this polemical parallelism, which is a clear prophecy of the coming centuries of martyrdom, may be established by very ancient witness. In other cases the word -which corresponds with the Primitive Christian term of-wor- ship may turn up only in later texts relating to the cult of the emperors. It could hardly be otherwise considering the fragmentary nature of the tradition. I am sure that in
1 2Cor. viii.9; Phil. ii. 5-11. These two passages certainly give the strongest outlines of Pauline “ Christology,” at any. rate those most effective with a popular auditory. Cf. my Paulus, pp. 112f., 2149 ff.; Paul, pp. 168 ff., 5192 ff.
2 A particularly fine appreciation of these facts was shown many years ago by Ferd. Kattenbusch, Das apostolische Symbol 2, Leipzig, 1900, p. 611 ff., and more recently by the Abbot of Maria Laach, Ildefons Herwegen, Das Kénig- tum Christi in dey Liturgte (offprint from ‘‘ Ehrengabe deutscher Wissenschaft ”’), Freiburg i. Br., 1920.
8 The New Testament also uses technical terms of contemporary con- stitutional law which by accident are not known to us from other sources. until later, e.g. Acts xxv. 21, εἰς τὴν τοῦ Σεβαστοῦ διάγνωσιν, “‘ for the decision of Augustus.’ διάγνωσις is a technical expression for the Latin cognitio, but is not found elsewhere until 144 a.p. (Berliner Griechische Urkunden, No. 891) ; and again at the end of the 2nd cent. a.D. in the title of an official ina Roman inscription, Inscriptiones Graecae, XIV. No. 1072 (also with the genitive τοῦ
Σεβαστοῦ, as in the Acts), ἐπὶ... διαγνώσεων τοῦ Σεβαστοῦ, “a . . . cogni- tionibus Augusti.”
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 343
certain cases a polemical intention against the cult of the emperor cannot be proved; but mere chance coincidences might later awaken a powerful sense of contrast:in the mind of the people.
It cannot be my task to collect together the whole gigantic mass of material in even approximate completeness; 1 I can only offer a selection of characteristic parallelisms.? Those versed in the subject will agree with me that it is not always possible in such cases to distinguish between the Imperial cud¢ and the Imperial Jaw; the Imperial cult was in fact a portion of the law of the constitution.
I begin with the family of ideas which groups itself round the word θεός, “God.” There can be no question of any kind of Christian borrowings from the language of the Imperial cult, because both the cult of Christ and the cult of the emperor derive their divine predicates from the treasure- house of the past. But the words compounded with or derived from “God” in the Imperial cult were the most likely to arouse the sensation of contrast; they were known to every plain Christian man by reason of their frequent occurrence, and their lack of all ambiguity brought even the very simplest souls, in fact the very simplest souls rather than others, into the most painful conscientious difficulties. Even St. Paul declared one of the signs of Antichrist to be that he would proclaim himself as God. We may leave to themselves all the minuter side-issues, ¢.g. the date when the divine titles were first bestowed on the living sovereign. As we are specially concerned with what the Primitive Christians felt, we need only point out that the difficulties of this contrast are older than the Imperial period. Under the successors of Alexander, who handed on to the Empire ready-made all the
1 I have therefore in this new edition not attempted to work in all the new material of which I have become aware in the interval. But besides the works already mentioned I would especially refer to Fritz Blumenthal, ‘“ Der Agyptische Kaiserkult,” Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung, 5, p. 317 ff., and W. Otto, ‘‘ Augustus Soter,” Hermes 45 (1910), p. 448 ff.
3 The work, already referred to (p. 112, ἢ. 4), of David Magie on the official formulae of the Imperial age has been of great help here. It does not, how- ever, in the least exhaust the epigraphical and papyrological material; by far the larger number-of my examples are derived from my own reading of the texts.
3 2 Thess. ii. 4.
344 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
essential forms used in the adoration of the sovereign, exactly the same problem confronted the pious Jew into whose hands fell, let us say, the coins of the Seleucidae 1 with the legend “God” upon them applied to the kings, or who drew up an inscription, friendly in other respects to. the State, to be placed on a synagogue in one of the scattered Jewish settlements ; however great the respect shown to the sovereign, the title of “God” is denied him.2. The Imperial age strengthened the feeling of contrast, since all the titles formerly bestowed on the various smaller rulers were now concentrated on one great ruler, and the conjecture made above? that the apocalyptic number 616 means “‘ Caesar God ”’ 4 appears in this connexion fairly obvious.
A few examples will show with what force those titles must have struck upon a monotheistic conscience. In an official inscription ὅ of the year 48 B.c. the town council of Ephesus, in conjunction with other Greek cities of Asia, spoke of Julius Caesar, who was then Dictator, as ‘‘ the God made manifest, offspring of Ares and Aphrodite, and common saviour of human life.’ A formula for an oath, ‘“‘ by Caesar, god of
1 To take one example out of many: a coin of the city of Aradus in Phoenicia has the legend Βασιλέως Δημητρίου θεοῦ Φιλαδέλφου Νικάτορος (Demetrius II., Nicator, 144 B.c.), Journal internat. d’archéologie numis- matique, 3 (1900) p. 148. The title ‘‘ god ” was however applied to Antiochus II. in the 3rd cent. B.c., cf. J. Rouvier, ἰδία. p. 146; also to Antiochus IV. Epiphanes, ibid. 4 (1901) p. 202.—Ptolemaic parallels are very plentiful. The Attalidae of Pergamum seem to have been less assuming (Max L. Strack, Rheinisches Museum, New Series, 55 [1900] p. 180 f.).—The best account of the whole matter is given by E. Kornemann, ‘“‘ Zur Geschichte der antiken Herrscherkulte,”’ Beitrage zur alten Geschichte [Klio] 1, pp. 51-146.
2 Examples of this in the Ptolemaic and Imperial periods in Johann Oehler, ‘ Epigraphische Beitrage zur Geschichte des Judentums,” Monatsschrift fir Geschichte und Wissenschaft des Judentums 53 (1909), p. 533; and cf. Juster 1, p. 342.
8 Page 278, n. 3. Cf. also p. 356, ἢ. 2 below, Martyrium Polycarpt viii. 2.
4 Καῖσαρ θεός. The word ‘‘ Caesar” of course means ‘“‘ Emperor ᾿᾿ here.
5 Dittenberger, Sylloge,? No. 347, “ΝΟ. 760, τὸν ἀπὸ “Apews καὶ ᾿Αφροδε[[της θεὸν ἐπιφανῆ «αἱ κοινὸν τοῦ ἀνθρωπίνου βίου σωτῆρα. The combination of σωτήρ and θεός, which is also used of Augustus, Inschriften von Olympia, No. 53 [quoted by Wendland, Zeitschrift f. d. neutest. Wissenschaft, 5 (1904) p. 342], is much older: a votive offering at Halicarnassus, 3rd cent. B.c. (The Collection of Ancient Greek Inscriptions in the British Museum, IV. 1, No. 906), is dedicated to the honour ‘‘ of Ptolemy the saviour and god,” Πτολεμαίου τοῦ σωτῆρος καὶ θεοῦ. The double form “ God and Saviour” afterwards became important in early Christian usage.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 345
god,” of the first year of Augustus,! and an inscription from Socnopaei Nesus in the Fayim, dated 17 March, 24 B.c., which also gives to Augustus the title “ god of god,’ 2 are particularly vivid examples. The calendar inscription of Priene (Figure 71) speaks of the birthday of Augustus simply as the birthday “ of the god” ; and, to mention one very remarkable instance from the time of St. Paul, Nero is actually called, in a votive inscription? of the before-mentioned 5 Gaius Stertinius Xenophon of Cos, “the good god,” with which, for the sake of the contrast, one may compare the passionate, classical saying in the gospel,* ‘‘ There is no man
1 Oxyrhynchus Papyri No. 145311, Katoap<a> θεὸν ἐκ θεοῦ (cf. Wilcken, Archiv fir Papyrusforschung 6, p. 423).
2 Dittenberger, Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae, No. 655, θεοῦ ἐκ θεοῦ. This formula is Ptolemaic (cf. the Rosetta Stone in honour of Ptolemy Vv. Epiphanes, tbid. No. 9010, ὑπάρχων θεὸς ἐκ θεοῦ καὶ θεᾶς καθάπερ *Qpos ὁ τῆς "Ἴσιος καὶ ᾿Οσίριος vids, ‘‘ he is god of god and of goddess, as Horus the son of Isis and Osiris’) and becomes very important later in Christianity as a deeply significant formula of belief. It appears to be first found in Gregory Thauma- turgus (tc. 270), as I am informed by Karl Holl (1 Aug., 1922); then in Lucian of Antioch, Eusebius of Caesarea, in the Nicene Creed, in Western texts of the Creed of Constantinople, etc. (References in William A. Curtis, A History of Creeds and Confessions of Faith, Edinburgh, 1911, pp. 55, 57, 71, 734.) In Gregory the influence of Origen is conjectured by Holl. That would be Egyptian influence !
3. Inschriften von Priene, No. 1054o1. [ἡ γενέθλιος] τοῦ θεοῦ.
4 Paton and Hicks, No. 92; cf. Herzog, Koische Forschungen und Funde, Pp. 196, ἀγαθῷ θεῷ. As far as I am aware, no other example of this title for an emperor is known at present. I assume that in the case of Nero the expression is somehow connected with the fact that immediately after his accession
. this Caesar was identified with the ’Aya@és Δαίμων (the god of the city of Alex- andria). The notification of his accession in an announcement which is no doubt official, Oxyrhynchus Papyri No. yo21 (17 Nov., 54 a.D.), calls him ᾿Αγαθὸς Δαίμων τῆς obxoupévys®* ἀρχὴ wv τε πάντων ἀγαθῶν: The title ᾿Αγαθὸς Δαίμων remains with him in an inscription from Egypt, 56 a.p. (Dittenberger, Orientis ἀγαθοὶ Inscriptiones Selectae, No. 666 =C.1.G. 4699). A coin of the city of Alexandria in B.V. Head, Historia numorum,? Oxford, 1911, p. 863, calls him Neo Aya. Aa. On the whole question cf. R. Ganszyniec (Ganschinietz), De Agathodaemone, Warszawa, 1919 (Arbeiten der Gesell- schaft der Wissenschaften zu Warschau II No. 17, 1919), p. 50; and Wilcken in The Oxyrhynchus Papyvi, Part VII (1910), p. 149. Wilhelm Weber (letter, Heidelberg, 9 Feb., 1911) conjectures with regard to Pap. Oxyrh. No. 1021 that the title was given in the decree of the governor of the Eastern Province, and sees in the adaptation to the Alexandrian cult an intentional piece of propaganda on behalf of the cult of the Emperor. Cf. also Blumenthal, p. 330, who refers to Schiff, Festschrift fiir Hirschfeld, p. 377 ff.
5 Cf. pp. 253, 294 above.
5 Mark x. 18 = Luke xviii. 19 (cf. Matt. xix. 17), οὐδεὶς ἀγαθὸς εἰ μὴ els ὃ θεός.
346 LIGHT FROM THE. ANCIENT EAST
good, but one, that is God.” Further quotations for the title “ god” are unnecessary ; the nets break if we try to get them all.1 Merely as an ocular demonstration of the way in which the inscriptions dinned this term of worship every day into the ears of everyone that could read, I reproduce here an inscription of the Imperial age from Pergamum ? (Figure 63) which mentions in line τὸ a Hymnodus of the god Augustus, and in line 13 f. a priestess of the goddess Faustina (wife of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius). - .
I have already treated of the title θεοῦ vids, “ son of God,” in another place. I remember discussing with a librarian friend of mine the fact that in many inscriptions and papyri of the Greek East Augustus and (with the name of their divine father inserted) his successors are called ‘‘ the son of a god.” My friend, a classical scholar, smiled benignly and said there could be no significance in that, ‘‘ for ’’ it was a translation of the Latin divi flius.4 I do not think that a Christian out of one of St. Paul’s churches would have smiled at the expression or have considered it non-significant.5 St. Paul’s preaching of the “son of God” had so quickened his religious feelings that he was bound to protest against the adornment of any other with the sacred formula. New individual quotations are unnecessary here; I give, again for ocular demonstra-
1 Many instances from a single city, in Thieme, Die Inschriften von Magnesia am Méaander und das Neue Testament, p. 28.
2 Die Inschriften von Pergamon, No. 523. The facsimile (Figure 63) is reproduced by kind permission of the Directors of the State Museums, Berlin. Cf. also Fig. 64.
3 Bibelstudien, Ὁ. 166 f.; Bible Studies, p.166f. Friedrich Pfister, Siidwest- deutsche Schulblatter, 25 (1908) p. 345 f., tries to account for the legend that Augustus dedicated an altar to Christ the Son of God by supposing that a votive inscription dedicated to the Emperor as ‘‘ the son of a god” was misinterpreted.
4 I may perhaps be allowed to interpolate another reminiscence (like that recorded on p. 147). It was the θεοῦ vids in No. 174 of the Berliner Griechische Urkunden that stimulated me, all in a flash, to a considerable part of the work that has occupied my life as a scholar. Some thirty years ago I happened to see the unbound volume in the hands of Wilhelm Schulze in the Marburg library. Looking over his shoulder I noticed the text, which caught my eye owing to its being an autograph reproduction. I was arrested, fascinated by the θεοῦ vids, and found myself, as I continued to turn the leaves, everywhere in the world of the New Testament and the world surrounding it.
5 Cf. U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Jahrbuch des Freien Deutschen Hochstifts, 1904, p. 24: ‘‘ Whoever regards the divi filius as empty ornament, or fraud, does not understand either the time or the man (Augustus).”
ΤΠΚΛΙΜΕΛΔΙΤΊΝ ΗΝ ΙΕΡΑ͂ΣΑ ΜΕΝΗΝΤΉΣΝΙ KH ΦΟΡΟΥΚΑΙΠΟΛΙΑΔΟΣ ἈΘΗ͂ΝΑΣΈΝΔΟΞΩΣ ΚΑΙ φιλο ΤΙΜΩΣ ΘΥΓΑΤΕΡΑΤΙΚΛΜΙ
ATOY APOMENSTIAPAAMAY
KHEANTOSIEPOYEEJZE
‘
(TAL KAKA Nee ἘΞᾺ y
ERFONHFIARAMMEN TOE : Σ LAE ME AITO TIEY ts 2/701KONEYNTE
_EANKAIETIForowa NIEPEIAN SB
415
Fic. 63.—Marble Pedestal from Pergamum with an Inscription in honour of a Priestess of Athene. Imperial Period. Now in the Berlin Museum. By permission of the Direc- tors of the State Museums.
“suinasnyl 9781 9111 JO SIOPOIICL ou} jo uorsstursed Ag “UInesny, {Π|198 94} UT MON ‘snysnSny jo esy ‘snysns8ny jo imouoy Ur ΤΟΙ ΔΙΙΟΒῸΤ Ue YPM unureSi0g Woy Teysoeped sqIeW—'b9 “OI
«δὺς -d]
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 347
tion, only two inscriptions. Five fragments of a marble pedestal from Pergamum ‘ (Figure 64) bear this inscription, which was put up in honour of Augustus while he was still alive :—
[Αὐτοκράτ]ορ[α K]aécapa [θ]εοῦ υἱὸν θεὸν Σεβαστὸ[ν] [πάσης] γῆς κ]αὶ θαλάσσης [ἐ]π[ὀπ]τ[ην]
The Emperor, Caesar, son of a god, the god Augustus, of every land and sea the overseer.
“ Overseer ’’ as a title of honour in this inscription recalls the use of the same word as a predicate of God in Judaism and Primitive Christianity.?
Then an example of St. Paul’s time—a votive inscription for Nero on a marble slab at Magnesia on the Maeander ὃ (Figure 65), between his adoption by Claudius and his acces- sion to the throne (50 and 54 A.D.). Nero is called (line 3 ff.) “ Son of the greatest of the gods, Tiberius Claudius,” etc.4
The adjective θεῖος, “divine,” belonging to the same family-group of meanings, is, like the Latin divinus, very common 5in the sense of “‘ Imperial’ throughout the whole Imperial period. So firmly had it established itself in the language of the court that it is found even in the period when Christianity was the religion of the State—a period far removed from the Primitive Christian standard of conscience. I will give but one example from the earliest, and a few from the later and latest period.* The calendar inscription of Priene (Figure 70), about 9 B.c., speaks of the birthday of Augustus “the most divine Caesar.” 7 The usage continues through
1 Die Inschriften von Pergamon, No. 381. The facsimile (Fig. 64) is reproduced with authority from the Directors of the State Museums at Berlin.
2 ἐπόπτης used of God in Additions to Esther v. 1 (xv. 2); 2 Macc. iii. 39, vii. 35; 3 Macc. ii. 21; and Clement of Rome, 1 Cor. lix. 3. Cf. p. 418 below. Much material in C. Burk, De Chionis epistulis, a Giessen dissertation, Darm- stadt, 1912, p. II. _
2 Die Inschriften von Magnesia am Mdander, No. 157b; the facsimile (Plate VIII.) is here reproduced (Fig. 65) by kind permission of the Directors of the State Museums, Berlin. The text on the left of the plate belongs to another inscription.
4 τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ μεγίστου θεῶν Τιβερίου Κλαυδίου, etc. Cf. Thieme, Die Inschriften von Magnesia am Μάσμάον und das Neue Testament, p. 33.
5 I cannot understand why Magie (p. 31) says the word was seldom used.
ὁ Cf. p. 91 above, and Neue Bibelstudien, p. 45 (= Bible Studies, p. 218).
7 Inschriften von Priene, No. 10529, τοῦ θηοτάτου Kaicapo[s].
348 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
the centuries, e.g. in the phrases 1 ‘‘ divine commandments,” “divine writings,” “ divine grace.’’ In the third volume of Greck Papyri in the British Museum we have no less than ten documents in which Christian emperors are called “‘ our most divine Lord ” 3—Justinian twice, 558 and 561 A.D.; Justin II. four times, 567, 568, 571, 576; Tiberius II. twice, 582; Maurice once, 583; Heraclius once, 633 A.D. Similarly we find θειότης, “ divinity,’ used of the (Christian) Emperor’s majesty,4 this also, of course, being taken over from the old language of religious observance.
In this connexion some light is perhaps thrown on the old title θεολόγος, “ the theologian,’ bestowed on the author of the Apocalypse.’ The well-known explanation, that he was so called because he taught the divinity of the Logos, is so obviously a little discovery of later doctrinaires, that it does not merit serious discussion. The title is much more likely. to have been borrowed from the Imperial cult. The theologi, - of whom there were organised associations, were quite well- known dignitaries in the Imperial cult of Asia Minor, against © which the Apocalypse protests so strongly. I have given the quotations elsewhere,® and it is significant that the examples come from the very cities mentioned in the Apocalypse, Pergamum, Smyrna, Ephesus. These “ theologians’ seem occasionally to have borne actually the name of sebastologi,’ as being the official special preachers in connexion with the Imperial cult in Asia Minor, and when we further consider
1 Cf. ἐντολή, γράμματα, below, p. 375 f.
4 See the index of that volume, p. 333.
3 χοῦ θειοτάτου ἡμῶν Seandrov. The superlative is still used as under Augustus.
4 Greek Papyri in the British Museum, Vol. 11. p. 273, No. 233 (345 A.D.). Other quotations in E. A. Sophocles, Greek Lexicon, p. 572.
5 P, Wendland, Deutsche Literaturzeitung 31 (1910), col. 1942, refers to Heidel, Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, XLV. 4 (1910). See moreover Reitzenstein, Historia Monachorum, p. 135 ff.
& Neue Bibelstudien, p. 58 f.; Bible Studies, p. 231 f. Cf. also Wilhelm Weber, Untersuchungen zuy Geschichte des Kaisers Hadrianus, pp. 140, 214.
7 This new and extremely remarkable word ceBaoroAdyos turned up in an inscription from Didyma (temp. Caligula), Wiegand, Siebentey vovldufiger Bericht (1911), p.65. It seems to me to stand in the same relation to θεολόγος as σεβαστοφόρος (recorded by Suidas) does to θεοφόρος. The inscription shows the enormous extension of the cult of the Caesars in the West of Asia Minor, which was the scene of apostolic missionary enterprise. Of New Testament cities Miletus, Pergamum, Laodicea, Adramyttium, Smyrna and Sardis had at that time already joined the cult of Caligula’s Philosebasti.
Fic. 65.—Marble Slab from Magnesia on the Maeander with a Votive Inscription for Nero, 50-54 A.D. Original at Pergamum; plaster cast in the Berlin Museum. By permis- sion of the Directors of the State Museums.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 349
that they were often hymnodi! at the same time, the borrow- ing of the title becomes all the more intelligible. John the Theologian, the herald ? of the true and ovly 8 God, is at the same time His great Hymnodus, leader of the choir of those who sing 4 “a new ode’”’® and “‘ the ode of Moses, the slave of God, and the ode of the Lamb.” 5
Most important of all is the, early establishment of a polemical parallelism between the cult of Christ and the cult of Caesar in the application of the term κύριος, “lord.” The new texts have here furnished quite astonishing revelations.’
1 References, Neue Bibelstudien, p. 58 1.; Bible Studies, p. 231f. The Greek expression is ὑμνῳδός, ‘singer of hymns,” e.g. Die Inschriften von Pergamon, No. 5231), Figure 63 above, p. 346. Minute details of the functions of the hymnodi are given in the Pergamum inscription No. 374, which has been excellently commented on by Max Frankel, and two portions of it are facsimiled below (Figs. 68 and 69). Hugo Koch, writing from Brauns- berg, 25 November, 1908, referred me to his book Ps.-Dionysius in seinen Beziehungen zum Neuplatonismus und Mysterienwesen, 1900, pp. 38-49. More recent works: Franz Poland, Geschichte des griechischen Vevreinswesens, Leipzig, 1909, p. 46f.; J. Keil, “ Zur Geschichte der Hymnoden in der Provinz Asien,’’ Jahreshefte des Osterreichischen Archdologischen Institutes, 1910.
2 “ Herald of God ” is perhaps the best translation of θεολόγος. A memory of this meaning lingers in John Chrysostom, who calls the author of the Apocalypse θεολόγον θεοκήρυκα, ‘‘ theologian and herald of God,’’ Ovat. 36 (cf. Suicerus, Thesaurus Ecclesiasticus, s.v. θεολόγος); so too an Anonymus in Boissonade, Anecdota, 5, p. 166 (quoted in the Thesaurus Graecae Linguae, s.v. θεοκῆρυξ). In the word “‘theologus ’’ the primary sense is that of a prophet; the doctrinal sense that now prevails among us is secondary.
3 In Rev. xv. 4 the word “only” has been inserted by John in the Old Testament quotation. i
4 The quotation in Eusebius, Eccl. Hist. V. xxviii. 5, is still entirely the utterance of the psyche of antiquity : τὰ yap Εἰρηναίου τε καὶ Μελίτωνος καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν τίς ἀγνοεῖ βιβλία, θεὸν καὶ ἄνθρωπον καταγγέλλοντα τὸν Χριστόν, ψαλμοὶ δὲ ὅσοι καὶ ῳδαὶ ἀδελφῶν an’ ἀρχῆς ὑπὸ πιστῶν γραφεῖσαι τὸν λόγον τοῦ θεοῦ τὸν Χριστὸν ὑμνοῦσιν θεολογοῦντες ; “ For who knows not the books of Irenaeus and Melito and the rest, preaching Christ as God and man? And how many psalms and odes, written by faithful brethren from the beginning, sing hymns unto Christ as the Word of God, proclaiming Him divine ?’’ Were we have Christian hymnodi and theologi, and their θεολογεῖν does hot mean “‘theologise.””
5 Rev. v. 9, xiv. 3.
® Rev. xv. 3. Cf. the many other hymn-like portions of the Revelation.
Τ I pointed out the essential lines in the history of this word in Die Christ- liche Welt, 14 (1900) col. 291; cf. also Deutsche Literaturzeitung, 27 (1906) col. 588 f. Similarly Lietzmann, Handbuch zum N.T. III. (1906) p. 53 ff. Cf. also Weinel, Die Stellung des Urchristentums zum Staat, p. 19; and W. H. P. Hatch, Some Illustvations, p. 1391. There is also important matter in Ferdinand Kattenbusch, Das apostolische Symbol, II., Leipzig, 1900, p. 605 ff. The whole problem has since been opened up to the widest discussion by Wilhelm Bousset’s Kyvios Christos, Géttingen, 1913, and the literature result- ing therefrom. |
350 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
It was previously known that Augustus and Tiberius had scorned the title of ‘lord,’ because it directly contra- dicted the Roman conception of the empire as a “‘ principate.”’ “ Lord ” is a term instinct with Oriental feeling ; the kings of the East have from time immemorial been “ lords,” and their subjects nothing better than slaves.
The same conception runs through the Oriental religions, which delight to express the relation of the divinity to the worshipper as that of the “lord,” or, as we saw in the in- scription of the beggar-priest of the Syrian goddess from Kefr-Hauar,! of the “lady” to the slave. In religious history the most important illustration of this is undoubtedly the Old Testament, especially in the Greek Septuagint trans- lation, which, following Jewish custom, has even replaced the divine name Jahveh by “ Lord.” ὃ
But we find “lord” or “lady” as divine names? ex- tending also into a number of cults of the Graeco-Roman world. ‘‘ The lord Serapis,” to take but one example, en- countered us in the letters of Apion, the soldier,* and: the prodigal son Antonis Longus.5 It may be said with certainty that at the time when Christianity originated “‘ Lord” was’ a divine predicate intelligible to the whole Eastern world. St. Paul’s confession of “‘ Our Lord Jesus Christ ’’ was his cosmo- politan expansion of a local Aramaic cult-title, Marana, applied to Jesus the Messiah by the apostolic Primitive Christians at Jerusalem and occasionally even by Paul himself in the outer world. Like the complemental thought, that the worshippers are the “slaves ᾿ 7 of the Lord, it was understood in its full meaning by everybody in the Hellenistic East, and it facili- tated the spread of the Christian terms of worship and of the
1 Above, p. 109. Cf. also the inscription from the temple of Isis at Philae, Pp. 352, n. 6 below; also p. 352, ἢ. 8.
2 On the far-reaching importance of this substitution see my little sketch Die Hellenisierung des semitischen Monotheismus, p. 173 [13] ff.
8 I have already referred (bid. p. 174 [14]) to the article “‘ Kyrios” in W. H. Roscher’s Ausfihrliches Lexikon dey griechischen und rémischen Mythologie. ᾿
4 Page 179 and Fig. 32 above.
5 Page 187 and Fig. 34 above. Also Sempronius, p. 193, Fig. 35.
6 Marana = Our Lord, 1 Cor. xvi. 22. Cf. also Didache x. 6.
7 This thought, also Eastern in origin, was specially adapted to the Hellen- istic world by St. Paul through the metaphor of sacral manumission; see Pp. 319 ff. above. :
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 351
cult of Christ itself. This becomes still clearer if we compare, for instance, St. Paul’s sacral expression “‘ the table of the Lord (Jesus Christ),”” 1 Cor. x. 21, with the analogous Egyp- tian expression,! “ the table of the lord Serapis,’’ which has been discovered in the papyri? and can be traced in abbreviated form as far as Cologne.®
This is no doubt a case of independent parallelism. St. Paul’s expression was most probably influenced by such: passages as Malachi i. 7, 12 and Ezekiel xxxix. 20, xliv. 16 in the Greek Old Testament. Another Pauline phrase, “ the table of devils’ (1 Cor. x. 21), seems to be connected with Isaiah Ixv. 11, Septuagint version. It is of course chrono- logically possible, but not at all probable, that the Serapis formula was influenced by the Christian one. All that can be said at present is that the two formulae (like the parallel “cup ’’-formulae ἢ are found side by side, and that no genealogical connexion is perceivable. The Egyptian analogy shows that in yet another vital point the language of ancient Christianity was approached by a usage of ancient paganism. St. Paul himself, wishing to make the Corinthians realise the nature of the Lord’s Supper, alluded to the analogy of the sacred feasts of the pagans (I Cor. x. 19-21).
Now it has generally been assumed hitherto that the Roman emperors were first named “lord” or “our lord” from Domitian onward, 1.6. not until after St. Paul’s time. That may be true of Rome and the West. In the East, however, as the records now show, the ancient title, which had long been in use in the language of the native courts, and the soul of which was of cult origin and nature, was bestowed on the emperors much earlier. The subsequent victory of the
1 Cf. Die Christliche Welt, 18 (1904) col. 37.
2 The Oxyrhynchus Papyri, Nos. 110 and 523, 2nd cent. a.D., invitations to “ sup at the table [literally ‘‘ couch” or “‘sofa’’] of the lord Sarapis,” δειπνῆσαι εἰς κλείνην τοῦ κυρίου Σαράπιδοο. Wilcken refers to Archiv fir Papyrus- forschung, 4, p. 211. These invitations are at the same time an excellent illustration of 1 Cor. x. 27; cf. Die Christliche Welt, 18 (1904) col. 36 f.
3 Cf. the Cologne inscription Soli Serapi cum sua cline and Wilcken’s remarks, Archiv fir Papyrusforschung, 6, p. 424. For the adoption of the Greek cult-word κλίνη into the Latin cult-vocabulary i in the form cline cf. the parallel ἐκκλησία, ecclesia (p. 112 f.).
4 In St. Paul himself ποτήριον κυρίου and ποτήριον. δαιμονίων, 1 Cor. x. 21;
with which cf. for example ποτήριον ᾿Αγαθοῦ Aaipovos in Ganszyniec (Gan- schinietz), De Agathodaemone, p. 28.
352 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
“‘ Dominate ” over the “ Principate ’”’ 1—ultimately a victory of Oriental over Roman feeling—was thus foretold centuries in advance.
Here too Hellenistic culture paved the way,? at least in Egypt. As it had been usual to address the Pharaoh with “Ὁ king, our lord,” * so a Munich Papyrus gives as one of the official titles of King Ptolemy IV. Philopator (221—205 B.c.), translated into Greek, ‘lord of the diadems’’4; and the Rosetta Stone ὅ attaches the same title to Ptolemy V. Epi- phanes (205-181 B.c.). Still more remarkable is it, how- ever, when on 12 May, 62 B.c., a high Egyptian official in an inscription on the door of the temple of Isis on the island of Philae calls Ptolemy XIII. “ the lord king god,” ® or when in an inscription from Alexandria of the year 52 B.c. the co-regents with this king (Ptolemy XIV. and Cleopatra) are called ‘‘the lords, the most great gods.” 7 In corre- sponding fashion an inscription from Pselkis (Dakkeh), in Nubia, 13 B.c., gives the title of “the lady queen ”’-to an Ethiopian Candace. It cannot, therefore, have sounded foreign to Egyptian ears when the Egyptian translators of the Old Testament into Greek rendered quite literally 9 the Semitic “ Lord King” which occurs not unfrequently in the original. Semitic and Egyptian here coincided, and
1.1.6. in constitutional law the victory of the theory that the Caesar is “Lord ” over the other theory that he is ‘‘ First” in the State.
2 Lietzmann, op. cit., p. 54 middle, disputes this.
8. Cf. U. Wilcken, Zeitschrift fiir die Aagyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde, 35 (1897) p. 84.
4 κύριος βα[σιλειῶν]; cf. Wilcken, Archiv fir Papyrusforschung, 1, p. 481 ff.
5 Dittenberger, Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae, No. 90.
8 Ibid. No. 186g, τοῦ κυρίου βασιλ[έ]ος θεοῦ. Before that he says ἥκω πρὸς τὴν κ[υ]ρίαν *Iow, “1 came to the lady Isis ’’—a good example of ‘lady’ as a divine title (cf. above, p. 350), but still more important as an analogue to the use of ἥκω, “1 come,” in the language of worship, instances of which occur on Orphic gold tablets, Lamellae Auveae Orphicae ed. A. Olivieri (Lietzmann’s “ Kleine Texte,” No..133), Bonn, 1915, pp. 9, 11, and 5: cf. the Septuagint Psalter and John vi. 37, πρὸς ἐμὲ ἥξει, ‘‘ shall come to Me.”
? Sitzungsberichte der Kgl. Preuss. Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, 1902, p. 1096, τοῖς κυρίοις θεοῖς μεγίστοις (cf. the explanation by U. von Wila- mowitz-Moellendorff, ibzd.). (Cf. «Ἑρμῆν μέγιστον in the Sedasa inscription, p. 280,n.6. ΤᾺ]
8 Now in Wilcken, Chrestomathie, No. 4, p. 11, τὴν κυρίαν βασίλισσαν (the word used for an Ethiopian Candace in Acts viii. 27). Afterwards there is mention of the κύριος Ἑρμῆς.
® κύριος βασιλεύς is therefore commion in the LXX, including the Apocrypha.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 353
when we find the same title applied to the Herods in Greek inscriptions 1 of Palestine (and other places), that is only another instance of the parallelism already? insisted on between Egyptian and Palestinian culture.
It is therefore in accordance with Egyptian or Egypto- Semitic custom that in numerous Greek papyri, inscriptions, and ostraca of the earliest Imperial period the title “ lord” is attached also to the Caesars by Egyptians and Syrians. Some temple accounts of the year I A.D. in the Oxyrhynchus Papyri® mention sacrifices and libations for “‘ the god and lord Emperor ”’ (Augustus). The Lysanias inscription from - Abila in Syria (before 29 a.D.), which names “the lord Cronos,’ speaks of ‘‘ the lords-Augusti,’”’ 4 by which Tiberius and his mother Livia are meant. There is literary record that Caligula allowed himself to be called “ lord.’’® An Egyptian document’? of the year 49 and an ostracon ὃ from Thebes of the year 54 call Claudius “ the lord.”
For Nero “ the lord,”’ 2.6. in the time of the most important of St. Paul’s letters, the number of examples suddenly rushes up tremendously. For a long while I was unable to account for this uprush, but I now think it possible that it is connected with the proclamation of Nero as Agathus Daemon in Egypt on his accession.® At any rate the statistics are quite striking; everywhere, down to the remotest village, the officials called Nero Kyrios. Wilcken’s book alone con- tains 27 ostraca dated after Nero “‘ the lord,’ among them the
1 A number of examples in Dittenberger, Ovientis Graecit Inscriptiones Selectae, No. 415 (Herod the Great), 418 (41 A.D., Herod Agrippa 1.), 423, 425, 426 (Herod Agrippa IT.).
2 Cf. p. 268 ff. above.
3 No. 1143: ὑπὲρ τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ κυρίου Αὐτοκράτορος.
4 Dittenberger, Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae, No. 606, τῶν κυρίων Σε[βαστῶν]. Better now, after the discovery of a new copy of the inscription (R. Savignac, Revue Biblique, 1912, p. 533 ff.), in Bleckmann, Zeitschrift des Deutschen Paldstina-Vereins 36 (1913) p. 220. See p. 5, n. 1 above. ~ 8 So among others Schiirer, Geschichte des jiidischen Volkes, 1.*p. 603, 34p, 7184. [Eng. trs., Div. I., vol. 2, by John Macpherson, Edinburgh, 1890, p. 338], Cagnat, Inscriptiones Graecae ad ves Romanas pertinentes, note on No. 1086.
® Aur. Vict. Caes. 3; cf. Christoph Schoener, Ueber die Titulaturen der rémischen Kaiser, Acta Seminarii Philologici Erlangensis, 2 (1881) p. 476.
7 The Oxyrhynchus Papyri, No. 37ει.
8 Wilcken, Griechische Ostraka, No. 1038. _
5 Cf. p. 345, ἢ. 4 above, and p. 365, ἢ. 2 below.
354 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
one of 4 August 63 which is facsimiled above.* My own collection also contains 8 Neronian Kyrios-ostraca, among them one with ‘“‘ Nero Kyrios” quite in the manner of a ‘formula? (without article, like the “ Kyrios Jesus” in 1 Cor. xii. 3). We find the title “ lord ” applied to Nero also in papyrus documents, of which a good example is the letter of Harmiysis, 24 July 66, of which a picture is given above ® (Figure 29). The officials who sign the document use the title three times. It is a very important fact that under Nero we first find the Kyrios-title in an inscription in Greece. The marble tablet of Acraephiae in Boeotia* which has yielded such an extraordinarily rich harvest, and which immortalises, among other things, a speech made by Nero at Corinth in November 67, contains a decree of honour in which the Boeotian town calls him once “lord of the whole world,” and then, what is in my opinion more important, simply “‘ the lord Augustus,” divine honours being awarded him by the decree. This important inscription shows how far the East had already penetrated on its march of conquest into the West. A living illustration of the inscription and the forebodings it arouses is supplied by the journey under- taken a year before (66 A.D.) by the Persian king Tiridates to do homage to the Emperor. Tiridates came from the East to Italy and did homage to Nero at Naples as “ the lord” and in Rome as “‘ the god.’’ 5
The fact that a New Testament writer ® well acquainted with this period makes Festus the Procurator speak of Nero simply | as “‘ the lord’ now acquires its full significance in this con- nexion. The insignificant detail, questioned by various commentators, who, seated at their writing-tables in Tiibingen or Berlin, vainly imagined that they knew the period better than St. Luke, now appears thoroughly credible.
1 Page 105 (Fig. 12).
2 Ostraca in the Deissmann collection (printed i in P. M. Meyer’ 5 Griechische Texte), Nos. 22, 23, 24, 25, 36a, 37, 76 Νέρων 6 κύριος, 39 Νέρων κύριος.
3 Page 173.
4 Most easily accessible in Dittenberger, Sylloge®, No. 37651, °8145;, ὁ τοῦ παντὸς κόσμου κύριος Νέρων; 55, τοῦ κυρίου Σεβαστοῦ [Νέρωνος].
5 Albrecht Dieterich, Zeitschrift fiir die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft, 3 (1902) p. 9 ff., has seen in this journey, which is recorded by Dio Cassius and others, one of the motives of the gospel story of the Adoration of the Magi.
6 St. Luke, Acts xxv. 26.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 355,
Further examples of the Kyrios-title down to Domitian could be easily given, especially from the ostraca,! but they are not necessary: It-is sufficient for our purpose to have realised the state of affairs in the time of Nero and St. Paul. And then we cannot escape the conjecture that the Christians of the East who heard St. Paul preach in the style of Phil. ii. 9, Ir and τ Cor. viii. 5, 6 must have found in the solemn confession 2 that Jesus Christ is “ the Lord ” a silent protest against other “lords,” and against “the lord,’ as people were beginning to call the Roman Caesar. And St. Paul himself must have felt and intended this silent protest,— as well as Jude, when he calls Jesus Christ ‘‘ our only master and Lord.” ὃ ;
Not many years later, soon after the destruction of Jeru- salem, Jewish rebels in Egypt, Sicarii from Palestine, so Josephus £ tells us (doubly credible when one thinks of what we were describing above—the Egyptian use of the title “lord” at this time), refused to call the Caesar “ lord,” because they ‘‘ held God alone to be the Lord,’’—and gave their bodies to be burned, men and boys.® Surely these Kyrios martyrs had. not yet: passed out of memory when, on 31 March, 116 A.D., an Egyptian Jewess, Mary, the daughter of Abietas, paid her Jewish poll-tax, and the collector dated her receipt by the year of the Kyrios Trajan. The ostracon,® which chance has preserved, is mentioned here only for the sake of its typical significance, reminding us vividly of two facts: the merciless march of
1 For instance, the Deissmann ostraca Nos. 17, 18, 47, 59, 86, 87 are Ves-- -pasian-ostraca with the title Kyrios; Nos. 40, 44, 77 are similar Domitian- ostraca; so also numerous ostraca in Wilcken.
2 “ God hath given Him [Jesus Christ] a name [ = Kyrios] which is above
every name . . . that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord {Kyrios],” Phil. ii.9, 11; ‘‘. . . as there be gods many, and lords many; but to us there is but one God . . . and one Lord Jesus Christ ” (1 Cor. viii. 5, 6).
3 τὸν μόνον δεσπότην͵ καὶ κύριον ἡμῶν, Jude 4. 4 Jewish Wars, VIL. x. τ. Already under Caligula Jews had been martyred
for refusing to worship the Caesar (Schiirer I*-* p. 499 [Eng. trs., Div. L, vol. 2, Ῥ. 9171). [Sicarii are the'‘ Assassins ” of Acts xxi. 38 R.V. ΤᾺ]
5 Windisch (Neue Jahrbicher fir das klassische Altertum 25 [1910], p. 204 f.) well contrasts this Jewish refusal with a Deissmann ostracon, No. 17, now in his possession, which is of this period (74-75 A.D.) and calls Vespasian Kyvios (P. M. Meyer, p. 137).
4 Deissmann ostracon No. 33 (P. M. Meyer, p. 151).
356 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
the Imperium over the conscientious objections of Jewish monotheism, and the nevertheless persistent mental anguish of the Jews, in whom secretly the old question would present itself poignantly at every fresh occasion when the tax fell due. At the period when their historic separation was about to be completed, Judaism and Christianity, in this inner sanctuary of their convictions, clung with equal fervour to the best belonging to their joint inheritance.
Though the grief and resentment of those Sicarian wit- nesses was not yet burning in those who loved Jerusalem before the catastrophe of the year 70, yet St. Paul and his friends were one with them in the religious protest against the deification of the Caesar. And a hundred years later the Christian exclusive confession of ‘‘ our Lord Jesus Christ,’’ which could not but sound politically dangerous to a Roman official (since from Domitian onwards the title “our lord” was applied to the Caesars),1 led to Christian martyrdoms, in repetition of the sufferings of the martyred Egyptian Sicarii. In the case of Polycarp, at Smyrna in the year 155, it was a question of the “lord’’-formula. ‘“ What is the harm in saying ‘lord Caesar’? ”’ the Irenarch Herod and his father Nicetes asked the saint seductively.2_ The scene enacted on 17 July 180 at Carthage before the judgment-seat of the Proconsul P. Vigellius Saturninus stands out even more plainly. The Roman official commands the Christian Speratus of Scili (Scilli) in Numidia 4: ‘‘ Swear by the genius of our lord the Emperor!’ And the Christian answers: “IT know no imperium of this world, . . . I know my Lord, the King of kings, and Emperor of all nations.”’ 5
1 Alfr. Fincke, De appellationibus Caesarum honorificis et adulatoriis, Diss. Regimonti Pr. [1867] p. 31 f.
2 Martyrium Polycarpi, viii. 2, τί γὰρ κακόν ἐστιν εἰπεῖν - κύριος Καῖσαρ; Extraordinarily characteristic of the Christian sense of the contrast is the date of this Martyrium (c. 21)—month, day, hour, names of the high priest and the proconsul, and then in the place where one would expect the Imperial regnal year : βασιλεύοντος δὲ εἰς τοὺς ἀἰῶνας ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ ᾧ ἡ δόξα, τιμή, μεγαλωσύνη, θρόνος αἰώνιος ἀπὸ γενεᾶς εἰς γενεάν" ἀμήν, ‘‘ and Jesus Christ reigning for ever, to whom is the glory, honour, greatness, and an eternal throne from generation to generation, Amen.”
Passio Sanctorum Scilitanorum, in R. Knopf’s Ausgewdhlte Martyreracten, p. 341. Quoted in this connexion by Lietzmann, p. 55.
4 Iura per genium domni nostri imperatoris.
5 Ego imperium huius seculi non cognosco, . . . cognosco domnum meum, regem regum et imperatorem omnium gentium,
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 387
That the old polemical parallelism was felt even after Christianity became the state religion is shown perhaps by the fact that the Christian emperors, though they did not drop the title of “lord,” often chose another Greek word instead. In Greek titles of Christian emperors in the papyri the word Kyrios is conspicuously eclipsed by the title Despotes (which occurs towards the end of the 3rd cent.1), as though . Kyrios was intended to be reserved for the heavenly Lord.
The Church of England prays “ through Jesus Christ our Lord ’’ for “ our most gracious Sovereign Lord” the King, and there is no offence in the collocation, but few users of this and similar prayers in modern Western liturgies ever dream of what lies behind those words—that there were times in which the most earnest among Christians went to execution rather than transfer to a man the divine title of their Saviour.
Still more strikingly than with the substantive, the parallel- ism between the language of Christianity and the official vocabulary of Imperial law shows itself in the use of the adjective κνυριακός, “ belonging to the Lord,” “ Lord’s.” Familiar to every reader of the New Testament from 1 Cor. xi. 20 and Rev. i. 10, where it occurs in the phrases “‘ the Lord’s supper ” and “ the Lord’s day ”’ (i.e. probably 2 Sunday), it may certainly be described as a very characteristic word of the early language of Christian worship, and it was formerly considered as a specifically Biblical and ecclesiastical word. some even going so far as to regard it as a coinage of St. Paul’s. But as a matter of fact St. Paul took it from the language of contemporary constitutional law, in which it meant ‘‘ Imperial.” I have shown elsewhere? on the authority of papyri and inscriptions that the word was common in Egypt and Asia Minor during the Imperial period in certain definite phrases, eg. ‘‘the lord’s treasury’ = imperial treasury, ‘‘ the lord’s service’ = imperial service, and I could now multiply the number of examples from the 2nd cent. A.D. onwards. :
1 Cf. Wilcken, Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung, 4, p. 260.
2 The Old Testament “ day of the Lord ’”’ might perhaps be meant. Later, however, the expression is often used for Sunday.
3 Neue Bibelstudien, p. 44; Bible Studies, p. 2171. For the two mistakes “in the spelling of the place-names at the end of paragraph 1 in the German
edition I am not responsible. Read, of course, ‘‘ Aphrodisias” and “ Thyatira.” Cf. also W. H. P. Hatch. Some Illustrations, p. 138 f.
358 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Instead of doing so here, I will only show a picture (Figure 66) of the inscription containing the oldest example yet known of the official use of the word in the Imperial period. It is an edict of the Praefect of Egypt, Ti. Julius Alexander, 6 July, 68 a.p., inscribed on the wall of the propylon of a temple at El-Khargeh j in the Great Oasis.1
In this edict the high Roman official, who was also a Jew like St. Paul, uses the word κυριακός twice. In line-13 he speaks of the “‘ imperial finances,’ ® and in line 18 of the “imperial treasury.” ® In their bearing on the methods of research these passages are extremely instructive. Scholars who only believe in the borrowing of secular words for purposes of the Christian religion when they are shown pre-Christian quotations,* will hardly wish to assert here that the Praefect of Egypt had borrowed the remarkable word which he uses’ a few years later than St. Paul from Christianity and intro- duced it into his own vocabulary of constitutional law. It is much more likely to be the case that the presumably older Hellenistic (perhaps Egypto-Hellenistic) ὅ word κυριακός was in use as a technical expression of constitutional law before St. Paul, though it happens not to be discoverable in con- stitutional use until after St. Paul had introduced it into the language of Christian worship.
In line 3 of the same inscription the Strategus of the Great Oasis, Julius Demetrius, who had to publish the Prae- fect’s edict, distinguishes the day of publication (x Phaophi = 28 September, 68 A.D.) by aname which must also be noted in this connexion, viz. julia Sebaste.® Moreover Sebaste
1 The best edition so far is that of Dittenberger, Onisnets Graect Inscrip- tiones Selectae, No. 669; all further literature 2bcd. The photograph of this important inscription is due to Professor Moritz, formerly of Cairo. A diapositive of this (lines 1-46), which I received from Baron F. W. von Bissing through Wilcken’s kind mediation, has been used for Fig. 66. The gigantic inscription can here only be given in a greatly reduced form; but with a magnifying glass even inexperienced persons can probably check the text toughly to some extent.
3 ταῖς κυριακαῖς ψήφοις; cf. Wilcken, Archiv fir Papyrusforschung, 4, p. 240.
3 τὸν κυριακὸν λόγον.
4 Cf. p. 77 above.
5 Cf. the Egypto-Hellenistic use of the substantive κύριος in sacral language, Pp. 352 f. above.
5 ᾿Ιουλίᾳ Σεβαστῆι. Wilcken, Zeitschrift der Savigny-Stiftung 43 (1909) P. 504, shows that it means the eponym-day of the Empress Livia, who had borne the name Julia Augusta since 14 A.D.
ΓΙΘΣΌΠΛΛ “A Aq poutezqo aarzisoderp Β ὑπο. ᾿ΟΥ̓́ΞΙ sour “αὙ go “ΑἸΠ[ 9 ‘rapuexopy snipnf TL pOoJoRIg 98} JO PIPY Ue YYM Poqurosur (sIseO }eaIH) Yosreyy-[q 18 e[dweay 911 10 uojAdoig ay} jo Te
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 359
alone occurs very frequently in the Imperial period as a name for a day, both in Egypt and in Asia Minor. It was first made known to us by the new texts, and although the problems it raises are not all solved yet, it may be said with some certainty that it means something like ‘‘ Augustus Day ”’; that is to say, a certain day 4 of the month received the name Sebaste in honour of the Emperor Augustus. On collecting the examples known to me many years ago,? I said that this name, formed probably after some Hellenistic model,? was analogous to the Primitive Christian “ Lord’s Day” as a name for Sunday.* But the more I regard this detail in con- nexion with the great subject of ‘‘ Christ and the Caesars,”’ the more I am bound to reckon with the possibility that the distinctive title ‘ Lord’s Day ’’ may have been connected with conscious feelings of protest against the cult of the Emperor with its ‘‘ Augustus Day.”
The “‘ Sebaste Day,” although never mentioned in literature, cannot have been a passing fancy of the “ adulators.” > The ostraca show it as an Eastern institution familiar even to the lower orders in the period which saw the birth of Christianity. Wilcken δ was able to refer to seven ostraca, ranging from 15 to 44 A.D., which are dated by the Sebaste Day. My own collection (No. 36) contains an eighth example, from Thebes, 23 September, 33 A.D. (Figure 67), which Wilcken deciphered
1 Or certain days of the month? Or (later) a certain day of the week ?
2 Neue Bibelstudien, p. 45 1.; Bible Studies, p. 218 f.; and Encyclopaedia Biblica, 3, col. 2815 1. References there to other literature; cf. Wilcken, Griechische Ostraka, 1, p. 812f.; H. Dessau, Hermes, 35 (1900) p. 333 f.; Thieme, Die Inschriften von Magnesia am Mdander und das Neue Testament, p.15f. A great advance was made by Blumenthal, p. 337 ff., who showed that in Egypt from 30 B.c.to Trajan the 24th [sic;? 26th. Tr.] of every month was kept as ἡμέρα Σεβαστή in memory of the birthday of Augustus (23 September), which in 30 B.c. fellon the 24th [26th? Tr.] of the month Thoth.
3 Cf. the ‘‘ King’s Day ”’ in the time of the Ptolemies, Encyclopaedia Biblica, 3, col. 2815 f.
4 E. Schiirer expressed himself in agreement with this, Zeitschrift fir die neutestamentl. Wissenschaft, 6 (1905) p. 2. A. Thumb, Zeitschrift fir Deutsche Wortforschung, I (1900) p. 165, and Archiv fir Papyrusforschung, 2, Ῥ. 424, came also to my conclusion.
5 Earlier investigators misunderstood many of, the institutions of the Imperial age by dismissing their technical expressions as ‘‘ adulatory ᾿᾿ and occasional.
ὁ Griechische Ostvaka, 1, p. 812; and the Strassburg Ostracon No. 203, Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung, 4, p. 146.
360 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
for me.! As a document from the hand of a simple money- changer it may serve to supplement the high official’s inscrip- - tion in the Oasis :—
διαγεγρά(φηκεν) ae Hepes ὑπ(ὲρ) χοϊματυκοῦ)
ιθ 1. <8 ἐξ γἀρόβοῖ καὶ Ba(avxos) νετρέβο9 ιὅ [8 <3 ¢—7 L5 καὶ τὰ τοὐύτ(ων) προσδ(ιαγραφόμενα) ἐξ —8 L5 L? κ Τιβερίου Καίσαρος
Σεβαστοῦ μηνὸς Σεβαστοῦ
Σεβαστῆι. Πετεμε(νῶφις) Πικ(ῶτος.)
Horus, the son of Permamis, has paid for embankment tax 9 of the 19th year six drachmae four obols, and for bath tax 1° four obols $: they are 7 drachmae, 2} obols; and of these the further levy of τᾷ obols.11_ In the year 20 of Tiberius Caesar Sebastos, in the month Sebastos, on Sebaste Day.!2 Peteme- (nophis), the son of Picos.!8
I have already hinted that these examples from Egypt are not isolated. Here, as so often, corresponding examples from Asia Minor 15 prove the unity of the culture on the eastern and southern shores of the Mediterranean. To illustrate the uniformity I give here (Figures 68 and 69) two portions of the inscription at Pergamum, of the reign of Hadrian,!5 which has been mentioned already in connexion with the hymnodi. The name Sebaste is here assumed to be
1 In P. M. Meyer, Griechische Texte, p.155. I have taken advantage of Meyer’s new reading of the ostracon.
3.1.6. ἔτους. 3 I.e. δραχμάς. 4 I.e. τετρόβολον.
5 Ie. ᾧ obol. 8.1.6. γίνονται. 7 I.e. 2 obols.
8.1.6. τ obol. The beginning of the line is to be extended: ἐξ ὀβολοῦ ἡμιωβελίου.
9 For the embankment tax cf. Wilcken, Griechische Ostraka, τ, Pp. 333 ff.
10 For the bath tax cf. Wilcken, ibid. p. 165 ff.
11 7.9. 14 obols per stater of 4 drachmae, cf. Wilcken, Archiv fiir Papyrus- forschung, 4, p. 147. ‘
12 Note the cumulation of Sebastos = Augustus. The month Sebastos is the Egyptian month Thoth, 29 August—27 September,
13 This collector’s name appears on other ostraca.
14 Neue Bibelstudien, p. 45 1.; Bible Studies, p. 218 f.; Encyclopaedia Biblica, 3, col. 2815 f.
16 Die Inschriften von Pergamon, No. 374 B and Ὁ. The drawing there given (p. 261) of sides B and D, on a scale of 1 : 6%, is here reproduced by kind permission of the Directors of the State Museums at Berlin (Figures 68 and 69). Cf. p. 349, n. 1 above.
Fic. 67.—Ostracon, Thebes. Dated Sebaste Day,
ber, 33 A.p. Receipt for Embankment and Bath Tax. in the Author’s collection.
23 Septem- Now
Of
SI
ΟΙ
jo uorsstuied Ag “umnuresi0g ye youoy ay} 10 predAzinos 97) ur MON *(
‘uelpeH ‘dma} ‘unwesieg 78 Ie}][e ΘΙ ΙΈΤΙ v UO LWOY ssappoS oy} pue snysnsny pos oy} 10 tpoumdp 94} JO uorydriosuy
60 “OILY
: \ HsIwH
VLEJOLZIOIAIVALS A0ZUVEALNOX
1 ΞΨΙΟ \ NIZULZNONIO ZAK oY
UNWAULIVA SIX ZIOPVOIAZUVNONWA ZONEWY ZAVVIVNOMdLVLUAVO HXIW AVL ZVNWAGLMV SIOA RIAd, LZAO LAVNONIO V¥VVIIVEIOHO ALX'UVONWAULAVA A AX ZAWU SH LIVAAOLZVEARAOLZVIRAORTA
AG We WY Mh EGU) NOL AVY NWNW |RSS TIER DICH LRAW αππξιλοῦν ZONHW
—~—__ --
NoLavNvnw ν ἢ NIZUGLE Wii A} UW EIVOd "1 ΛΌΡΗΝΝΗ RONHW ι AO,LUAVAO,L OY VX NVNW SVldvWAONWI ZIVIUNVVVAAOLLIAdaO ZONHW TARO ALO CEABULW AT AMOBS,10 LIAX adVLU LAVINA ULV ΚΟ, SUX AL IHOVAV
ixouunaiuavionisoxaeaovina\
Fed DBD
!
89 “SIT
alm AON
LOMAO.LHANONYSIVZISIVILNO,HVAOAY 4 VHaavsaviw Os ve δὰ δ OLN UISIGAOLAY
NOMOYNO,LZISAO LNAVUIW.La AH VOLIV-Y BIEN Xd VO | ID HaXOdLINON WAIVE 13 SIONS WOAVLL νυ ΝΥ ΕΝ ΞΟ, Τὶ TULL EVAARX
TULL, ZAONXAVIWANON VaIVI VA NONWLOL | IW νὰ a WAZHEVYUNU LAV ΚΙΟῚ ἃ ZI OLIVA Mog UNWA S AONVOALE IVE UIA VUNWAULLNA
Nig Unv} 9,12 ZIOld HAP ZIOLIV A KIOWU'NWA ~10.L, RAONVO AL EN'UdIO,LVd JOLAV Ν σα ΞΊΟΙΚ
aN DA RIVIUOVRIVAIVA UIE ANG UN HWNY
AOLRVOIAKAOLNL αὶ OWKOSAA OAV IAT Adv] [
NoddV NVNW olf AOI Ladd 8 «Ά11Ὰ XZ ONHW — NOLdIV NVNW
asters Ὁ RIOIdHILZAW 1-49 UV ZONHW ΜΟΙ ἂν NVNW
MMO OWIVOI «CFR ZOWHNVU ZONHW
NOLaAV NVYNW SIVIAVAONYI VV AOLLIAISURONHW NYNW ACHEVIARUIRINGI «ἈΚ Ξοὰν SIWAZONNY SOW << OAAA O <SwWxXdV ZL WX adWulUsLA VINALULL << LHIXA,L ΓΡ19 Ἢ \ = Ξ =
‘uljiag 28 SUINaSnYT 9727S 917 JO S1OZPOIIC 94} 69 ᾿ΒιΗ ‘q) apis 391 pue (go 311 ὋΠ opis ust
cz
Lora
Gr
or
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 361
so well known that it is not written out in full but abbreviated in three places (B. 4, 8; D. 10) as Σεβ or Σεβ.
In these three passages where the Sebaste Day is mentioned in the inscription the reference is to money payments of a religious nature which two officials, the Eukosmos and ‘the Grammateus, of the association of hymnodi have each to make on this day. Money payments due on Sebaste Day are heard of again on an inscription at Iasus,! and all the ostraca that mention the Sebaste Day are receipts for money. Were then the Sebaste Days, I would ask, favourite days for effect- ing payments in the Hellenistic East? And I would further ask, with all caution ἐπ When St. Paul advised the Christians of Galatia and Corinth 2 to raise their contributions to the collection for the saints by instalments payable every Sunday, was he linking them with some such custom then prevalent in the world around him? The question is at least justifiable. For my own part I hesitate to return an affirmative answer, because it seems to me more probable to assume that St. Paul’s advice was connected with some system of wage- paying (of which, however, I know nothing) that may have been customary in the Imperial period.
If at the pregnant words “ God” and “ Lord ” all manner of sensations of protest were roused in the Christian worshipper against the cult of the Caesar, this was of course also the case with the still more impressive combination κύριος καὶ θεός, “Lord and God,’’ which, as the confession of St. Thomas,? is one of the culminating points (originally the climax and concluding point) of the Gospel of St. John. In Christian worship it was probably a direct suggestion from the Sep- tuagint.t It probably made its way into the Imperial cult from Mediterranean cults: an inscription at Socnopaei Nesus in the Fayim, 17 March, 24 B.c., already cited,® mentions a building dedicated “to the god and lord®
1 Neue Bibelstudien, p. 46; Bible Studies, p. 219.
2 1 Cor. xvi. I, 2. ¢ § John xx. 28. 4 E.g. Psalm Ixxxv. [Ixxxvi.] 15, Ixxxvii. [Ixxxviii.] 2.
5 Page 345. τῶι θεῶι καὶ κυρίω Σοκνοπαίωι.
* Two quite gross and quite individual instances of purely adulatory usage are furnished by the petitions of Egyptian priests : Berliney Griechische Urkunden, No. 1197 (26th year of Augustus), which attaches to an official who obviously controlled the financesof thetemple the lofty formula’ Ασκληπιάδῃ
-τῶι θεῶι καὶ κυρίωι (pointed out to me by W. Schubart, letter, Berlin, 31 July,
362 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Socnopaeus,”’ and an inscription of the Imperial period at Thala in the Province of Africa1 is consecrated to “ the god lord Saturnus.” Under Domitian (i.e., in New Testament terms, in the Johannine period) we have the first example in the cult of the Caesars. Domitian himself arranges to be called “our lord and god.’’? Received not without protest at the outset,? the phrase becomes quite official in the third century, but its use had continued meanwhile in the East, as shown by an inscription from the Tauric Chersonese 4 in which the Emperor Antoninus Pius is called “ our god and lord.”
A whole chain of sensations of contrast and protest’ is dependent on the central thought in Primitive Christian worship, that Jesus is the βασιλεύς, the “ King.” In the Hellenistic East, which received its stamp from the post- Alexandrian kings, the title “king’’ had remained very popular,’ and was even transferred to the Roman Emperor, as we see for example in the New Testament. It has been well shown by Weinel’ that in the age of the Revelation of
1909), and No. 1201 (31st year of Augustus), in which a (priest?) Soterichus receives the same predicate (pointed out by Schubart at the same time). Mammon-worship, it seems, in the literal sense !
1 Cf, Berliner Philologische Wochenschrift, 21 (1901) col. 475: deo domino Saturno. ;
2 Sueton., Domit. 13, dominus et deus nostey. Further examples in Schoener, p. 476f., and Harnack, Lehrbuch dey Dogmengeschichte, 15, Freiburg i. B:, 1888, p. 159 [History of Dogma, trans. by Neil Buchanan, I, London, 1894, pp. 120, 189].
3 Franz Morth, in the Festschrift der 50. Versammlung Deutscher Philologen und Schulmanner, Graz, 1909, p. 191, refers to Martial X. 7235: dicturus dominum deumque non sum.
4 Inscriptiones Antiquae Orae Septentrionalis Ponti Euxini Graecae et Latinae, ed. Latyschev, IV. No. 7177. τὸν [θε]ὸν ἁμῶν καὶ δεσπόταν.
5 The expression νόμος βασιλικός, ‘‘ the royal law,” James ii. 8, occurs also in the technical usage of the surrounding world. The law of astynomy at Pergamum, carved on stone in the time of Trajan but going back probably to a time before the Christian era, has a heading, formulated perhaps by the donor of the inscription in the time of Trajan, which says: τὸν βασιλικὸν νόμον ἐκ τῶν ἰδίων ἀνέθηκεν, ‘he set up the royal law out of his own means”’; cf. Athenische Mitteilungen, 27 (1902) p. 48 ff. 1 saw the original at Pergamum on Good Friday 1906. The law is called ‘“ royal’”’ because it was made by one of the kings of Pergamum. So too in the Epistle of James we must probably understand the term in the first place with reference to the origin of the law.
δα Tim. ii. 2; 1 Peter ii. 17. Numerous examples from inscriptions, etc., in Magie, p. 62.
7 Die Stellung des Urchristentums zum Staat, pp. 19, 21 f., 50 ff.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 363
St. John to confess the kingdom of Jesus was to set vibrating a tense polemical feeling against the Caesars. The clearest example is perhaps the apocalyptic formula 1 “ Lord of Lords and King of Kings.” The title ‘‘ king of kings”? was originally in very early Eastern history a decoration of actual great monarchs and also a divine ° title, especially well known as applied to the Achaemenidae in Persia. It was suggested to the Christians not only because it was attached to God in the Greek Bible,* but also because according to the evidence of parchments, coins and: inscriptions it was actually borne at the period in question by the Arsacidae,® and by princes of Armenia,* the Bosporan kingdom,’ and Palmyra.®
It would be possible in the case of many individual words 9 belonging to the retinue of “ king” to prove the parallelism between the language of Christian worship and the formulae of the Imperial law and the Imperial cult. But I wish only to emphasise the characteristic main lines and accordingly dispense with details.
In the case of the word σωτήρ, “ Saviour,” the parallelism
1 Rev. xvii. 14, xix. 16. Cf. also the confession of the martyr Speratus, Pp. 356 above.
2 βασιλεὺς βασιλέων. .
3 Cf. Otto Pfleiderer, Das Christusbild des urchristlichen Glaubens in veligtons- geschichtlicher Beleuchtung, Berlin, 1903, p. 95 ff. Samuel Brandt (postcard, Heidelberg, 10 December, 1908) refers for the profane use to Humann and Puchstein, Reisen in Kleinasien und Nordsyrien, p. 281.
4 2 Macc. xiii. 4; 3 Macc. v. 35.
5 The parchments from Kurdistan facsimiled above (Figs. 4 and 5, facing PP. 32, 33) are particularly fine examples; both of these ist cent. docu- ments begin in 1. 1 with βασιλεύοντος βασιλέων *Apadkov. Much material bearing on the title is collected in Minns, p. 38 f. :
6 A Tigranes has it occasionally on his coins from 83 to 69 B.c., Wochen- schrift fiir klassische Philologie, 20 (1903) col. 218.
7 Inscriptiones Antiquae Ovae Septentrionalis Ponti Euxini, ed. Latyschev, IV. Nos. 200, 202 (probably Sauromates I., 93-123 A.D.); II. Nos. 27, 358.
8. Septimius Herodianus, the second son of Zenobia, has the title in an inscription at Palmyra, Lidzbarski, Ephemeris ΝῺ semitische Epigraphik, ΤΣ, p. 85. ‘
® E.g. ἐξουσία, κράτος, ἰσχύς, δύναμις, μεγαλειότης, θριαμβεύω, λάμπω, δόξα, τιμή, χάρις, δωρεά, φιλανθρωπία (on this word cf. Weinreich’s Halle ‘’ Habili- tationsschrift,”-De dis ignotis, Halis Saxonum, 1914, p. 50 ff.), ἀρετή, αἰώνιος. See in Bibelstudien, p. 277 ff., Bible Studies, p. 360 ff., the parallel between 2 Peter i, 11, ‘the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,” and a Carian inscription, Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum No. 2715 a, b (Stratonicia, earliest Imperial period), “ the everlasting dominion of the lords the Romans.” There is also material in Thieme, Die Inschriften von Magnesia am Mdander und das N.T.
364 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
a
is particularly clear. I will simply refer to the splendid articles by Harnack,! Wendland,? Lietzmann,° and W. Otto, and will myself call attention to one special point only. The ample materials collected by Magie ὅ show that the full title of honour, ‘‘ Saviour of the world,” with which St. John ὃ adorns the Master, was bestowed with sundry variations in the Greek expression 7 on Julius Caesar, Augustus, Claudius, Vespasian, Titus, Trajan, Hadrian, and other Emperors in inscriptions of the Hellenistic East. The exact Johannine term § is specially common in inscriptions for Hadrian.® Another fact, the great importance of the Emperor Nero in the establishment of the idea of a Saviour of the world, has only recently come before me with due clearness. On his accession Nero was venerated in the East as “ saviour of the world.” 105. This was no mere isolated excess of adula- tion; it points to the institution of a cult, as suggested by the fact. that this cult of Nero as ‘“‘ saviour of the world” left its creative mark on language. The Emperor himself coined a catchword that would have been inconceivable apart from the cult as an institution, viz. σωσικόσμιος, ‘‘ world- saving, world-rescuing,”’ or rather, “ of or belonging to the world-rescuer, the world-saviour.” 14 The word, it is true, has been found no earlier than the time of Hadrian,” when
1“ Der Heiland,’ Die Christliche Welt, 14 (1900) No. 2; now in his Reden und Aufsdtze, I., Gieszen, 1904, p. 307 ff.
2 ΣΏΤΗΡ, Zeitschrift fiir die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft, 5 (1904) P- 335 ff.
3 Der Weltheiland, Bonn, 1909.
4 P. 343, n. 1 above. 5 Op. cit., p. 67 1.
8 John iv. 42, 1 John iv. 14, σωτὴρ τοῦ κόσμου.
7 σωτὴρ τῆς (ὅλης) οἰκουμένης, σωτὴρ τοῦ κόσμου, etc. Cf. H. Lietzmann, Der Weltheiland, Bonn, 1909.
8 On the combination ‘‘ God and Saviour ” cf. p. 344, n. 5 above. _
9 Wilhelm Weber, Untersuchungen zuy Gesch. des Kaisers Hadrianus, ῬΡ. 225, 226, 229.
10 On this cf. Blumenthal, p. 330 f., who refers to Dittenberger, Orientis Graecit Inscriptiones Selectae, No. 668, and examines the question why Nero was hailed as saviour of the world.
11 When a phyle is called σωσικόσμιος, the translation is not ‘‘ world-rescuing phyle,”’ but ‘ World-rescuer’s phyle,’’ as it were ‘‘ phyle with the sign, token, colours, ‘arms’ of the World-rescuer.”
12 Weber, Untersuchungen zur Gesch. des Kaisers Hadvianus, pp. 241, 250; Kenyon, Archiv f. Papyrusforschung, 2, p. 70 ff., especially pp. 73, 75. Σωσικόσμιος is the name of a deme of the city of Antinoé which Hadrian had founded in Egypt. Cf. also W. Schubart, Archiv f. Papyrusforschung,
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 365
it occurs as the name of a deme or phyle in Egyptian towns; but Wilcken 1 has shown, in a manner as convincing as it is concise, that it was Nero himself, at the very beginning of his reign, who coined not only this σωσικόσμιος in allusion to himself as saviour of the world, but many other similarly fervid names for phylae of Alexandria.2 It is specially worth noting that in this point also the parallelism between the cult of the Caesars and the cult of Christ afterwards took effect practically. In later Christian usage? we find Nero’s σωσικόσμιος (and σωσίκοσμος) in the language of the cult ‘—a curious chapter in the history of the world’s estimate of Nero, which in antiquity passed through all stages from saviour of the world (a title advanced gratis) to Antichrist.® The word ἀρχιερεύς, “ high priest,” to which the Epistle to the Hebrews gave currency as a worshipful term applied to Christ, shows how easily a cult-word that was certainly developed within Primitive Christianity from Jewish premises entered as if spontaneously into the usual parallelism as soon as it found itself in the world. It was by this Greek
5, pp. 94-103; P. M. Meyer on the Hamburg Papyrus No. 14 (Griechische Papyrus-Urkunden der Hamburger Stadtbibliothek I. 1, p. 59), and on Papyrus No. 6 in the library of the New Testament Seminar, Berlin (Grie- chische Texte, p. 45, with a note by me). Friedrich Pfister, Siidwestdeutsche Schulblatter, 25 (1908) p. 345, points out the importance of the expression σωσικόσμιος in the history of cosmopolitanism.
1 Archiv 5, p. 182 ff.
2 Comparing this fact with the two others, viz. that Nero was at the beginning of his reign elevated to the position of god of the city of Alexandria (p. 345, 0. 4 above), and that he was the first to whom the title of Kyrios was given on a very large scale (p. 353 f. above), we may venture to say that in the East at any rate the year 54 constitutes quite a big notch in the history of the cult of the Caesars. But that is the classical period of Kyrios con- fessions in the Pauline cult of Christ, which thus acquire their most real and striking background of contrast. We must not forget the fragmentary nature of the tradition in the case of both cults: but even the fragments speak a very clear language.
8 Cf. E. A. Sophocles’ Lexicon, 5.0. σωσικόσμιος (and σωσίκοσμος), and the Thesaurus Graecae Linguae, 5.0. σωσίκοσμος.
4 E.g. as adjective attached to εὐχή. Specially characteristic is John of Euboea, Sermo in conceptionem Deiparae, in Migne, Patrologia Graeca, 96, col. 1476 A: ἡ σωσικό ἐκ παρθένου γένεσις τοῦ παμβασιλέως Χριστοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ ἡμῶν.
5 In this connexion the points of contact between the Roman idea of a saviour of the world and the Jewish idea of the Messiah should not be over- looked. Flavius Josephus, viewing them both together, proclaimed Vespasian the rescuer of the world (cf.-W. Weber, Josephus und Vespasian, Stuttgart, 1921, pp. 40 ff. and 80).
366 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
word, as numerous inscriptions 1 have shown, that the title pontifex maximus, borne by the Emperors, was translated in the East.
The parallelism exists not only with sacred titles in the narrower sense, it goes further. Several examples are now forthcoming to prove that the word εὐαγγέλεον, “gospel, good tidings,’’ which was in use in pre-Christian times in the profane sense of good news, and which then became a Primitive Christian cult-word of the first order, was also employed in sacral use in the Imperial cult. The oldest example is that calendar inscription of Priene, about 9 B.c., which we have mentioned ? twice already, and which is now in the Berlin Museum. Discovered by German archaeologists on two stones of different kind in the north hall of the market-place at Priene, and published for the first time by Theodor Mommsen and Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff with other allied texts and a commentary,? this inscription, designed to introduce the Asian calendar, has already been appreciated by Adolf Harnack * and Paul Wendland ὅ as of great importance in the history of the sacred language of Asia Minor. Harnack translated the most important parts into German. H. Winnefeld kindly obtained for me a photograph of lines 1-60, from which, with the consent of the Directors of the State Museums, our Figures 70 and 71 have been made, their size being less than one-quarter of the original. As far as I know these are the first facsimiles to be published of these important texts.? Here we find (line 40 f., Figure 71) this remarkable sentence referring to the birthday of the Emperor Augustus :—
ἦρξεν δὲ τῶι κόσμωι τῶν & | But the birthday of the god was αὐτὸν εὐανγελίζων ἡ γενέθλιος] | rod | for the world the beginning of θεοῦ. tidings of joy on his account.®
1 See Magie, p. 64. 2 Pages 345, 347 above.
3 Athenische Mitteilungen, 24 (1899) p. 275 ff.
4“ Als die Zeit erfiillet war,” Die Christliche Welt, 13 (1899) No. 51; now in his Reden und Aufsdtze, I. p. 301 ff.
5 Zeitschrift fiir die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft, 5 (1904) p. 335 ff.
6 The Greek text is now most easily accessible in Dittenberger, Ovientis Graect Inscriptiones Selectae, No. 458, and Inschriften von Priene, No. 105.
7 The whole inscription consists of 84 lines.
* Hans Lietzmann, Theologische Studien und Kritiken, 1909, p. 161, trans- lates differently. Eduard Norden wrote to me (postcard, Berlin-Lichterfelde,
᾿ΒΙΠΠΙΘΘΠΙΝ 9324S 91} FO S1OJIeII ey} 10 ποιββιιπαϑθά AG ᾿ΠΙΠΘΒΠΙΝ UIE 9} UI MON 9΄8 6 vI49 “18--1 soul “ΠΟΙ ΔἸΙΌΘΤΙΤ JEpUZ[e) oy} YIM ‘ous Je Joy 91} JO ΠΒΗ YWON 912 10 1ῈΠΠΠ e Woy suojsaumry ontq jo yoorg—'oL ‘ory
wis
ἃ ἢ
“suInSSNy 8787S 91} 10 SIOJOII 912 10 uorsstutsad AG “wasn UT[ag 912 UT MON ‘o'a 6 v2419 ‘og—zE 591Π| ‘uoydrosuy TePUSTRD OF UM ‘ous Fe 29) 1Ὲ]Δ OY} JO [TRH YON 911 jo IeTIg 8 Wor ΘΙΩΙΈΪΝ e71YAA Jo YOo[gG—'1Z “9101
09
ςς
ος
ji
a fy Sb
Peat “ata
oF
ce
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 367
Several centuries later we hear the echo ofthese festal trumpets. An Attic inscription! uses the word with refer- ence to Septimius Geta, the Caesar. Still later, on the receipt of the “ joyful tidings ” that G. Julius Verus Maximus had been proclaimed Caesar, an Egyptian, probably a high official, wrote to another a letter, preserved on a fragment of papyrus in the Prussian State Library at Berlin, calling for a procession to be arranged for the gods. The fragment, which was written not long after the death of Maximinus Thrax (238 A.D.), reads :—
ἐπεὶ γν[ώ]στίης ἐγενόμην τοῦ] Forasmuch as I have become εὐανγελ[ίο]υ ὃ περὶ τοῦ dyy-| aware of the tidings of joy ; concerning the proclaiming as Emperor of Gaius Julius Verus Maximus Augustus, the son 5 ἡμῶν Αὐτοκράτορος Καίσαρος of our lord, most dear to the  Tatov Ἰουλίου Οὐήρου Μαξιμίνου gods, the Emperor Caesar Εὐσεβοῦς Εὐτυχοῦς Σεβ[αστο]ῦ | Gaius Julius Verus Maximinus, παῖδα Tdiov Ἰούλιον Οὐῆρον pious, happy, and Augustus, it is necessary, O most honourable, that the goddesses4 becelebrated in festal procession. In order, Geds* κωμάζεσθαι. ἵν' therefore, that thou mayest [o]év εἰδῆς καὶ παρατύχης know and be present .. .
[Here the papyrus breaks off.
a as a γορεῦσθαι Καίσαρα τὸν τοῦ
- θεοφιλεστάτου κυρίου
Μάξιμον Σεβαστόν, IO χρή; τιμιώτατε, τὰς
6 Dec. 1922) : ‘‘ Von Wilamowitz agrees with me in thinking that the words τὰ δι᾿ αὐτὸν εὐαγγέλια can only mean ‘the tidings of joy that have gone forth on his account.’ By that we are to understand the prophecies See to Augustus in Sibylline and other oracular literature.”
1 Inscriptiones Graecae III. No. 10 = *No. 1081, as restored recently by Kirchner: βουλὴ συνήχθη ἐπὶ τοῖς [εὐαγγ]ελίοις, ἀναδειχθέντος [Αὐτοκράτορος Καίσαρος Ποπλίου Σεπτιμίου Γέτα . . .J. 1 quote from Weinreich (De dis ignotis, p- 43f.), who had access to the advance proofs of the second reprint. Cf. also the use of εὐαγγελίζω in the Giessen Papyrus No. 27 and Kornemann’s observations thereon; also Moulton and Milligan, Vocabulary, p. 259.
2 Published by G. Parthey, Memorie dell’ Instituto di Corrispondenza Aycheologica, 2, Lipsia, 1865, p. 440. Ulrich Wilcken revised the text some years ago, and very kindly supplied me with his readings, which I have adopted here (letter, Leipzig, 4 October, 1907).
8 Lines 1 and 2 are so restored by me. Parthey read y[wlor after ene; when Wilcken re-examined the fragment these letters were no longer there. For γνώστης cf. Acts xxvi. 3. A possible reading would be ἐπεὶ γν[ω]στ[εία ἐγένετο τοῦ], ‘‘now that confirmation has come of the good news’; for youorela οἱ. Faydm Towns and their Papyri, No. 65, (2nd cent. a.p.),—The
(For continuation of notes see next page.
-368 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Yet another of the central ideas of the oldest Christian worship receives light from the new texts,* viz. παρουσία, “advent, coming,” 2 a word expressive of the most ardent hopes of a St. Paul. We now may say that the best inter- pretation of the Primitive Christian hope of the Parusia is the old Advent text,’ ‘‘ Behold, thy King cometh unto thee.” From the Ptolemaic period down into the 2nd cent. A.D. we are able to trace the word in the East as a technical expres- sion for the arrival or the visit of the king or the emperor.‘ The parusia of the sovereign must have been something well known even to the people, as shown by the facts that special payments in kind and taxes to defray the cost of the parusia were exacted, that in Greece a new era was reckoned from the parusia of the Emperor Hadrian, that all over the world advent-coins were struck after a parusia of the emperor, and that we are even able to quote examples
of advent-sacrifices.® The subject of parusia dues and taxes in Egypt has been
1 Even Cremer,’ Ὁ. 403, could only say: ‘‘ How the term came to be adopted, it would be difficult to show.” He inclines to think it was an adaptation of the language of the synagogue.
a The translation ‘‘ coming again ”’ is incorrect.
8 Zech. ix. 9; Matt. xxi. 5.
4 Or other persons in authority, or troops. On the history of the word cf. G. Milligan, St. Paul’s Epistles to the Thessalonians, London, 1908, p. 145 ff.; E. Ὁ. Wood, The Life and Ministry of Paul the Apostle, London [1913], p. 123f. Interesting material also in G. Plaumann, Griechische Papyri der Sammlung Gradenwitz, Heidelberg, 1914, p. 22 ff. There will be found Gradenwitz Papyrus No. 2 (225-224 B.C.) : πρὸς τὴν τοῦ Δωσιθέου pera τοῦ βασιλέως παρουσίαν, “for the parusia of Dositheus, who is with the King (i.e. attached to the court).”” How thoroughly established the word was is shown by the fact that it is used, for shortness, to denote the expenses usual in connexion with the parusia of high officials. Cf. the complaint of the priests of Isis at Philae (Ptolemaic period) in Dittenberger, Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae No. 139, ἀναγκάζουσι ἡμᾶς παρουσίας αὐτοῖς ποιεῖσθαι.-
5 Otto Immisch (letter, Giessen, 18 October, 1908) refers to the λόγοι ἐπιβατήριοι, “speeches on entering a place,” for the forms of which see Menander in the Rhetoves Graect, ed. Spengel, 3, p. 377 ff.
Continuation of notes to page 367 :— first word of the second line was wrongly read by Parthey εὐανγέλθαι. The restoration εὐανγελ[ίο]υ, suggested by Wilcken’s reading edaryeA. .v, suits best.
4 (The reviewer of the first edition of this book in The Times, 15 Dec. (Literary Supplement, 16 Dec.), 1910, proposed to read θέας, ‘‘ spectacles.”’ The translation would then be, “ that the spectacles (or games) be celebrated.’
Tr]
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 369
treated in detail by Wilcken.!. The oldest passage he men- tions is in the Flinders Petrie Papyrus II. 39 6, of the 3rd cent. B.c., where, according to his ingenious interpretation, contributions are noted for a crown of gold to be presented to the king at his parusia.2_ This papyrus supplies an excep- tionally fine background of contrast to the figurative language of St. Paul, in which Parusia (or Epiphany, “‘ appearing ’’) and crown ® occur in collocation. While the sovereigns of this world expect at their parusia a costly crown for them- selves, ‘‘ at the parusia of our Lord Jesus ’”’ the apostle will wear a crown—the “‘ crown of glory” (1 Thess. ii. 19) won by his work among the churches, or the “‘ crown of righteous- ness ’’ which the Lord will give to him and to all them that have loved His appearing (2 Tim. iv. 8).
I have found another characteristic example in a petition, circa 113 B.C., which was found among the wrappings of the mummy of a sacred crocodile. A parusia of King Ptolemy, the second who called himself Softer (‘‘ saviour ’’), is expected, and for this occasion a great requisition has been issued for corn, which is being collected at Cerceosiris by the village headman and the elders of the peasants.’ Speaking of this and another delivery of corn, these officials say :—
. καὶ προσεδρευόντων did τε . .. and applying ourselves νυκτὸς καὶ ἡμέρας μέχρι τοῦ τὸ | diligently, both night and day, unto fulfilling that which was set before usand the provision of ἐπιγεγραμμένην πρὸς τὴν τοῦ βασι- | 80. artabae which was imposed λέως παρουσίαν ἀγορὰν 7... for the parusia of the king .. .
΄ 2 a \ ᾿ προκείμενον ἐκπληρῶσαι καὶ τὴν
Are not these Egyptian peasants, toiling day and night in expectation of the parusia of their saviour king, an admir- able illustration of our Lord’s words (Luke xviii. 7) about
1 Griechische Ostvaka, I. p. 274 ff. Cf. also Grundziige, p. 356f.; and E. Biedermann, Studien zur dgyptischen Verwaltungsgeschichte, Berlin, 1913, p. 83 f.
2 ἄλλου (scil. στεφάνου) παρουσίας 8, “‘ for another (crown) on the occasion -of the parusia, 12 (artabae).”’ Cf. also Griechische Ostraka I. p. 296.
3 Cf. also p. 309 above.
4 The Tebtunis Papyri No. 489.
5 πρεσβυτέρων τῶν yew(pydv). This is a new quotation to show the age of the title ‘‘ presbyter,” cf. Bibelstudien, p. 153 £.; Neue Bibelstudien, p. 60 ff.; Bible Studies, pp. 154 f., 233 f.
370 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
the elect who cry day and night to God, in expectation of the coming of the Son of Man (Luke xviii. 8) ?
Again among the Tebtunis Papyri? there is a bill, from the end of the 2nd cent. B.c., which mentions “ the parusia of the king,”’ while an ostracon 2 of the 2nd cent. B.c., from Thebes, reckons the expenses of the “ parusia of the queen.”
As in Egypt, so also in Europe and Asia: the uniformity of Hellenistic civilisation is proved once more in this instance. An inscription of the 3rd cent. B.c. at Olbia® mentions a parusia of King Saitapharnes, the expenses of which were a source of grave anxiety to the city fathers, until a rich citizen, named Protogenes, paid the sum—goo pieces of gold, which were presented to the king. Next comes an example of great importance as proving an undoubted sacral use of the word, viz. an inscription of the 3rd cent. B.c., recording a cure at the temple of Asclepius at Epidaurus,4 which mentions a parusia of the healer (saviour) god Asclepius. Other examples of Hellenistic age known to me are a passage in Polybius 5 referring to a parusia of King Antiochus the Great, and two letters of King Mithradates VI. Eupator of Pontus at the beginning of his first war with the Romans, 88 B.c., recorded’ in an inscription at Nysa in Caria.6 The prince, writing to Leonippus the Praefect of Caria, makes twofold mention of his own parusia, 1.6. his invasion of the province of Asia.’
It is the legitimate continuation of the Hellenistic usage that in the Imperial period the parusia of the sovereign should shed a special brilliance. Even the visit of a scion of the Imperial house, G. Caesar (ft 4 A.D.), a grandson of
1 No. 11657, βα(σιλέως) παρουσίας.
2. Wilcken, No. 1481, λόγος παρου(σίας) τῆ(ς) βασιλ(ίσσης).
3. Dittenberger, Sylloge,? No. 226, ®No. 49585¢., τήν τε παρουσίαν ἐμφανισάντων τοῦ βασιλέως, “᾿ when they announced the parusia of the king.”
4 Dittenberger, Sylloge,2 No. 803, 8No. 116094, τάν τε π[α]ρουσίαν τὰν αὑτο[ῦ π]αρενεφάνιξε ὁ ᾿Ασκλαπιό[ς], ‘and Asclepius manifested his parusia.” For the combination of parusia with manifestation see 2 Thess. ii. 8.
5 Hist. xviii. 314 Dibner: ἀποκαραδοκεῖν τὴν ᾿Αντιόχου παρουσίαν, “ to expect earnestly the parusia of Antiochus.’’ The verb is very characteristic, cf. Rom. viii. 19, and p. 373, n. 3 below, the petition of the small proprietors of the village of Aphrodite.
5 Dittenberger, Sylloge,? No. 328,2 No. 74121, 90, »γ[Ὁν] τε τὴϊν ἐμὴ]ν παρουσίαν ἐπιγνούς (OF πυθόμενος), ‘‘ and now, having learnt of my parusia.”
? This is Theodor Mommsen’s explanation of the expression, Athenische Mitteilungen, 16 (1891) p. ror f.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS ‘HISTORY 371
Augustus, was, as we know from an inscription,! made the beginning of a new era in Cos. In memory of the visit of the Emperor Nero,? in whose reign St. Paul wrote his letters to Corinth, the cities of Corinth and Patras struck advent- coins.? Adventus Aug(usti) Cor(intht) is the legend on one, Adventus Augusti on the other. Here we have corresponding to the Greek parusia the Latin word advent, which-the Latin Christians afterwards simply took over, and which is to-day familiar to every child among us. How graphically it must have appealed to the Christians of Thessalonica, with their living conception of the parusiae of the rulers of this world, when they read in St. Paul’s second letter * of the Satanic “‘parusia ’’ of Antichtist, who was to be destroyed by “ the manifestation of the parusia’”’ of the Lord Jesus! A whole host of advent-coins resulted from the numerous journeyings of the Emperor Hadrian; we have specimens,® I suppose, from most of the Imperial provinces, and these, it may be remarked, were official coinages of the Empire.* The arrival of Hadrian at Rome on 9 July, 118, was even celebrated by the Arval brothers with solemn sacrifices in the Eniperor’s, presence, to which the inscriptions containing the Acts of their college bear record.’ At Didyma the day of Hadrian’s visit was called a “holy day.”’& The parallelism between the Hellenistic and the Imperial period is seen also in the
.
1 Paton and Hicks, The Inscriptions of Cos, No. 391, [ἐνιαυτοῦ πρώτου τᾶς [Γαΐ]ου Καίσαρος ἐπιφανείας, ‘in the first year of the epiphany [synonymous with parusia, cf. p. 373 below] of Gaius Caesar.” This prince enjoyed a regular cult in Cos, cf. Herzog, Koische Forschungen und Funde, p. 145.
2 For this visit cf. the inscription of Acraephiae, p. 354 above.
3 Weber, Untersuchungen zur Geschichte des Kaisers Hadrianus, p. 93, cites the two coins (= Cohen I. 307, No. 403/4).
4 2 Thess. ii. 8, 9, 6 ἄνομος, ὃν ὃ κύριος ᾿Ιησοῦς . . . καταργήσει τῇ ἐπιφανείᾳ τῆς παρουσίας [cf. the inscription of Epidaurus, p. 370, n. 4 above] αὐτοῦ, οὗ ἐστὶν ἡ παρουσία κατ᾽ ἐνέργειαν τοῦ Σατανᾶ, “ the lawless one, whom the Lord Jesus . . . shall destroy by the manifestation of His parusia, whose parusia is according to the workings of Satan.”
5 Examples in Weber, Untersuchungen, pp. 81 (Rome), 109 (Britain), 115 (Spain), 125 (Bithynia), 130 (Asia), 150 (Moesia), 155 (Macedonia), 197 (Sicily), 198 (Italy), 201 (Mauretania), 227 (Phrygia), 247 (Alexandria).
6 T have this on the (unwritten) authority of Wilhelm Weber.
1 Weber, Untersuchungen, p. 81 ff. The Acts read 0b adventum I(mp(era- tovis) etc.] and ob adven(tum faustum eiusdem].
8 Inscription from Didyma (hand-list No. 350; printed in Wiegand’s Bericht VII. p. 54; see p. 13, ἢ. 6 above): ἱερᾷ ἡμέρᾳ τῆς ἐπιδημίας (cf. Ῥ. 372, notes 6 and 7) τοῦ Αὐτοκράτορος Τραιανοῦ "Αδριανοῦ Καίσαρος.
372 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
fact that the expenses attending a parusia of the sovereign were considerable.1 How deeply a parusia stamped itself on the memory is shown by the eras that were reckoned from parusiae. We have heard already of an era at Cos dating from the epiphany of G. Caesar,? and we find that in Greece a new era was begun 8 with the first visit of the Emperor Hadrian in the year 124;—the magnificent monu- ments in memory of that parusia still meet the eye at Athens * and Eleusis. There is something peculiarly touching in the fact that towards the end of the 2nd century, at the very time when the Christians were beginning to distinguish the “ first parusia ”’ of Christ from the ‘‘ second,” ὅ an inscription at Tegea ® was dated :—
ἔτους £6’ ἀπὸ τῆς θεοῦ ‘A-| in the year 69 of the first : Spravpd τὸ πρῶτον is τὴν Ἑλλάδα | parusia of the god Hadrian παρουσίας. in Greece,
To make the circle of Hellenism complete once more, this inscription from Arcadia gives us again the word parusia, which we found in Egypt, Asia Minor, and the New Testa- ment. In Greece, however, a synonym, epidemia, is more usual.”
Even in early Christian times the parallelism between the parusia of the representative of the State and the parusia of Christ was clearly felt by the Christians themselves. This is shown by a remarkable petition 8 of the small pro- prietors of the village of Aphrodite in Egypt to the Dux of
1 Weber, Untersuchungen, p. 183 ¢54-
2 Page 371, n. 1 above.
3 Weber, Untersuchungen, pp. 158 ff., 183, 186.
-4 The gate of Hadrian and the Olympieum, which was then begun (Weber, Untersuchungen, p. 164).
5 Cf. for instance Justin Martyr, Dialogue with the Jew Trypho, c. 14 (Otto, p. 54) τὴν πρώτην παρουσίαν τοῦ Χριστοῦ, and similarly in c. 52 (p. 174). The Christian era was afterwards reckoned from the first parusia.
6 Bulletin de Correspondance Hellénique, 25 (1901) p. 275. Quite similar formulae occur in Attic inscriptions of earlier date, but with another sub- stantive: ‘‘in the year x of the first epidemia of the god Hadrian,” cf. Weber, Untersuchungen, p. 159.
7 ἐπιδημία. Cf. p. 371, n. 8; p. 372, n. 6; other examples are quoted from inscriptions by Weber, Untersuchungen, pp. 159, 183, 188.
§ T owe this excellent example to Ulrich Wilcken (letter, Leipzig, 6 February, 1g09); cf. Archiv, 5, p. 284.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 373
‘the Thebaid in the year 537-538 A.D.,1 a papyrus which at the same time is an interesting memorial of Christian popular religion in the age of Justinian.
“It is a subject of prayer with us night and day, to be held worthy of your welcome parusia.’”’?
The peasants, whom a wicked Pagarch has been oppressing, write thus to the high official, after assuring him with a pious sigh at the beginning“that they awaited him
“as they watch eagerly from Hades for the future parusia of Christ the everlasting God.” ὃ
Quite closely related to parusia is another cult-word, ἐπιφάνεια, “ epiphany,” ‘‘ appearing.” 4 How’ closely the two ideas were connected in the age of the New Testament is shown by the passage in 2 Thess. ii. 8, already quoted, and by the associated usage of the Pastoral Epistles, in which “epiphany τ᾿ or “appearing” nearly always means the future parusia of Christ,5 though once® it is the parusia which patristic writers afterwards called “΄ the first.” Equally clear, however, is the witness of an advent-coin struck by Actium-Nicopolis for Hadrian, with the legend ‘‘ Epiphany of Augustus" 7; the Greek word coincides with the Latin word ‘‘ advent” generally used on coins. The history of: this word “ epiphany ’’ goes back into the Hellenistic period, but I will merely point out the fact, without illustration : the observation is not new, but the new proofs available are very abundant.®
1 Published by Jean Maspéro, Etudes sur les papyrus d’Aphrodité, Bulletin de l'Institut francais d’archéologie orientale, t. VI., Le Caire, 1908.
~ 2 ΤΙ. 16, καὶ εὐχῆς ἔργον ἡμῖν ἐστὶν νυκτὸς καὶ ἡμέρας ἀξιωθῆναι τῆς κεχαρισμένης ὑμῶν παρουσίας.
81, 2, ἐκδέχομεν . . . οἷον οἱ ἐξ “Αδου καραδοκοῦντες τὴν τότε τοῦ Χ(ριστο)ῦ ἀενάου θ(εο)ῦ παρουσίαν. For the Greek text cf. Rom. viii. 19, and p. 370, n. 5 above.
4 Cf. Milligan, Thessalonians, p. 148 f. ᾿
δ 1 Tim, νἱ. 14; 2 Tim. iv. 1, 8; Titus ii. 13. 6 2 Tim. i. 10.
7 Weber, Untersuchungen, p. τοῦ, ἐπιφάνια Αὐγούστου.
8 Cf. [Sir] W. M. Ramsay, ‘‘ The Manifest God,” The Expository Times, Vol. 10 (1899, February) p. 208; Thieme, Die Inschriften von Magnesia am Madander und das Neue Testament, p. 34 ff.; Weinel, Die Stellung des Urchris- tentums zum Staat, pp. 20, 50.—Parallels are traceable also in the Christian and secular use of the adjectives ἐπιφανής and ἐμφανής. There is much material relating to the Christian use in Hermann Usener, Religionsgeschichtliche Unter- suchungen, Erster Theil, Das Weihnachtsfest, Kapitel I.-III., Bonn, 1889.
374 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
The same parallelism that we have hitherto been observing is found again in the names applied to persons standing in the relation of servants to Christ and the Caesars, and in other similar points. The proud words of St. Paul, “ We are ambassadors for Christ ’’ (2 Cor. v. 20; cf. Eph. vi. 20), stand out in quite different relief when we know that πρεσβεύω, “1 am an ambassador,” and the corresponding substantive πρεσβευτής, “ ambassador,’’ were the proper terms in the Greek East for fhe Emperor’s Legate.1
In the same way πεπίστευμαι, “1 am entrusted (with an office, with the gospel),’’ which is repeatedly ? used by St. Paul, recalls the Greek name (known from literary sources) of the Imperial secretary for Greek correspondence,’ especially when we remember the beautiful figure in 2 Cor. iii. 3, accord- ing to which St. Paul has a letter to write for Christ.4 This characteristic expression includes a parallel to the technical term “letter of Augustus,’”’ 7.6. Imperial letter, which is found in an inscription of the Imperial period at Ancyra.® The seven letters of Christ in the Revelation to Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea,* which as regards their form must be reckoned with the letters from heaven,’ find a background in the social history of the time in the numerous Imperial letters to cities of Asia Minor or to corporations in those cities, which were immediately published in the form of inscriptions, and so became known to everybody. To mention only
1 Examples of the verb from inscriptions, etc., Magie, p. 89; innumerable examples of the substantive, ibid. p. 86 ff.
3. Gal. ii. 7; 1 Cor. ix. 17; cf. 1 Thess. ii. 4; 1 Tim. i. 11; Titus i. 3.
* In Latin ab epistulis Graecis; in Greek ὁ τὰς “Ἑλληνικὰς ἐπιστολὰς πράττειν πεπιστευμένος, and τάξιν ἐπὶ τῶν ᾿Ελληνικῶν ἐπιστολῶν πεπιστευμένος ; examples. from Galen and Josephus, Magie, p. 71.
4. ὅτι ἐστὲ ἐπιστολὴ Χριστοῦ διακονηθεῖσα ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν, ‘that ye are a letter of Christ, ministered by us.”
5 Cagnat, Inscriptiones Graecae ad ves Romanas pertinentes, 111. No. 188, ἐπιστολῶν ' Ἑλληνικῶν [Σε]β(αστοῦ), ‘‘ of the Greek letters of Augustus.”
5 The question of the sequence of the names of these cities will have to be examined some day; it seems that the writer is conforming with official usage. In an inscription from Miletus (56-50 B.c.) a Roman Propraetor mentions his letter to the public authority (κοινόν) of the Hellenes and specifies eight cities by name, among them Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Sardis (in this order !); cf. Th. Wiegand, Milet, Heft 2 (Das Rathaus von Milet), p. ror f.
7 Cf. p. 245 above.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 375
addresses that occur in the Apocalypse, we possess at the present day in inscriptions larger or smaller fragments of at least six Ephesus letters,1 three Smyrna letters,? at least seven Pergamum letters,? and perhaps one Sardis letter,‘ from Roman Emperors. The introductory formula in those letters of Christ—the solemn “ Thus saith’ '—comes most assuredly from an Oriental (Old Testament) usage, but it is certainly not without interest to find at least ‘‘ Saith”’ δ as the formula at the beginning of Imperial letters already of the first century.’
Philo, Josephus,® and 2 Tim. ili. 15 have made us familiar with the name ἱερὰ γράμματα, “sacred writings,” ‘‘ holy scripture,” as a title of dignity for the Old Testament. The parallelism between letters of Christ and letters of the Emperor becomes still. clearer when we find the same term in technical use in the East 9 for Imperial letters and decrees. In pre-Christian inscriptions it often 1° means the “ hiero- glyphs.” But an inscription from Nysa in Caria of the time of Augustus?! uses it probably of an Imperial ?
1 References in Léon Lafoscade, De epistulis (aldisque titulis) imperatorum “[p. 149, n. 5 above], pp. 12, 14 f. (Hadrian), 23, 24, 25 (Antoninus Pius), 34 (Septimius Severus and Caracalla).
2 Lafoscade, pp. 29 (Marcus Aurelius), 28 (Antoninus Pius), 29 f. (Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus); all three are addressed to religious associations (σύνοδοι) at Smyrna. —
8 Lafoscade, pp. 7 f. (Nerva or Trajan), 9 (Trajan), 10, 17 (Hadrian), 23 (Antoninus Pius), 35 (Caracalla), 58 (various emperors).
4 Lafoscade, p. 59 (uncertain).
5 τάδε λέγει. Cf. next note but one.
ὁ dicit and λέγει. References to inscriptions in Lafoscade, p. 63.
7 Independently of me Gunnar Rudberg, “ Zu den Sendschreiben der Johannes-Apokalypse,’’ Eranos 11 (1911) p. 170 ff., pointed out the resem- blance to the letters of Persian kings. The same writer (p. 173 ff.) has more to say about τάδε λέγει.
8 References to both authors in Cremer,® p. 275 f.
® Cf. A. Wilhelm, Jahreshefte des Osterreichischen Archdologischen In- stitutes in Wien, 3 (1900) p. 77.
10 Examples in Dittenberger, Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae, II. p. 642.
11 Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum, No. 2943.0- I think it also possible that τὰ ἱερὰ γράμματα here means old temple documents.
12 Ample illustration of the use of the word “ holy”’ or “ sacred” (sacer, sanctus, sanctissimus, sacvatissimus) as a designation of the Emperor and Imperial institutions in pagan and Christian times is given by W. Sickel, Géttingische gelehrte Anzeigen, 1901, p. 387 ff. Cf. also H. Delehaye, Sunctus, Analecta Bollandiana 28 (1909) p. 145 ff.; Guil. Link, De voci's * sanctus’ usu pagano, a doctoral dissertation, Regimonti, 1910.
376 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
decree; and this is certainly the case with an inscription from Aezani in Phrygia of the time of Hadrian, an unpub- lished inscription of the Imperial period at Athens,? and a bilingual inscription at Paros,? 204 A.D., which translates the Greek term in Latin as sacra[e littjerae. The Latin Vulgate employs exactly the same phrase in rendering 2 Tim. iii.15! The phrase θεῖα γράμματα, “ divine writings ”’ (used of the Bible by patristic writers), is applied quite synonymously to letters of the Emperor in an inscription from Tyras on the Dniester, 17 February 201, a.p.,4 and an inscription from Scaptopare in Bulgaria, 238 a.p.° The latter refers to Imperial ordinances as ‘‘ divine command- ments,” ® which resembles the New Testament term “ God’s commandments.” 7
In this connexion attention may once more be called. to the Primitive Christian’s designation of himself as δοῦλος Χριστοῦ, “ slave of Christ,” which we have already 8 looked at against another background. Though not designed originally as a formula of contrast to the cult of the Caesar, it certainly aroused sensations of contrast when heard beside the frequent title of “slave of the Emperor ” :— there were Imperial slaves all over the world. One example out of many is an inscription ® from Dorylaeum in Phrygia, Imperial period, which mentions “ Agathopus, slave of the lord Emperor.’’ The same observation applies to the parallel formulae δεώκονος Χριστοῦ, ‘ minister of Christ” (2 Cor. xi. 23; Col. i. 7; 1 Tim. iv. 6) and minister Augusti.!
1 Le Bas-Waddington, No. 860,3, τῶν ἱερῶν τοῦ Καίσαρος γραμμάτωϊν].
2 Cf. A. Wilhelm, loc. cit.
§ Dittenberger, Sylloge,? No. 415 (3No. 881) = Inscriptiones Graecae, XII., V. 1, No. 132.
4 Inscriptiones Antiquae Ovae Septentrionalis Ponti Euxini Gyraecae et Latinae, ed. Latyschev, I. No. 33, ἀντίγραφον τῶν θείων γραμμάτων, “ copy of the divine writings.”
5 Dittenberger, Sylloge,? No. 418,3 No. 88895, τὰ θεῖά σου γράμματα, “ thy divine writings.”
δ Line 51, rats θείαις ἐντολαῖς.
7 ἐντολαὶ θεοῦ, 1 Cor. vii. 19; Rev. xii. 17, xiv. 12.
8 Page 325 ff.
® Bulletin de Correspondance Hellénique, 28 (1904) p. 195, ᾿Αγαθόποδι δούλῳ τοῦ κυρίου Αὐτοκράτορος.
10 Examples from Pompeii ἀγα given by E. Bormann in the “ Wiener Eranos," Wien, 1909, p. 314 ff. They seem to have been officials connected with the cult of the Emperor.
Fic. 72.—Marble Stele from Cos, Tombstone of Hermes, an Imperial Freedman, after 161 A.D. Now in the house of Said Ali in the town of Cos. By permission of Rudolf Herzog and the publishing house of Theodor Weicher (Dieterich'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung).
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 377
The same order of parallelism obtains between the genitive Χριστοῦ, “belonging to Christ” (Gal. iii. 29, v. 24; 1° Cor. i. 12, iii. 23, xv. 23; 2 Cor. x. 7), and the simple genitive Καίσαρος, ‘“‘ belonging to the Emperor.” The latter, first revealed by the new texts, goes back to the Latin elliptic Caesaris, and can be established for Egypt by several papyri of the reign of Augustus and by inscriptions of the reign of Hadrian.1 The analogy which has been already ? claimed on linguistic grounds between the oldest name for the followers of Christ, Χριστιανός, “ Christian,” and Καισαριανός, “ Caesarian,’”’ ‘‘ Imperial (slave),” ὃ receives in this connexion new and remarkable illustration.
Characteristic too is the parallel between St. Paul’s phrase ἀπελεύθερος κυρίου, “freedman of the Lord” (1 Cor. vii. 22), and the frequent title ‘‘ freedman of the Emperor.” It appears, for instance, in a Latin inscription of the 2nd -century at Cos ὁ (Figure 72), on the tombstone of the Imperial freedman Hermes, who had been an official of the inheritance- duties department. In the third and fourth lines he is called Augustor(um) n(ostrorum) lib(erto), ‘‘freedman of our Augusti.” In Greek the title is also of frequent occur- rence, with many variations,’ from the first century A.D. onwards.
Finally, when Christ says in St. John’s Gospel ® (xv. 14 f.):—
“Ye are My friends. . . . Henceforth I call you not slaves ”—
the collocation of “slave” and φίλος, “ friend,” reminds us that the Emperor also had “ friends,” as well as “‘ slaves.”
1 The first examples were given by Wilcken, Griechische Ostraka, I. p. 661 f. (the London Papyrus No. 256 is now accessible, Greek Papyri in the British Museum, Vol. II. p. 95 ff.); cf. also Archiv fir Papyrusforschung, 1, p. 145. New examples are given by W. Schubart, Archiv, 5, p. 116 ff., who thinks they refer to freedmen.
2 Winer-Schmiedel, § 16, 2c, note 18 (p. 135).
3 References for Caesavianus in Theodor Mommsen, Hermes, 34 (1899) p. 151 f., and Magie, p. 73.
4 Rudolf Herzog, Koische Forschungen und Funde, p. 106f., No. 165. The facsimile there given *(plate V. 4) is here reproduced (Fig. 72) by kind per- mission of the editor and his publisher. The teyminus post quem for the inscription is 161 4.D. : ;
5 Σεβαστοῦ ἀπελεύθερος or ἀπελεύθερος Καίσαρος. Many examples in Magie, p- 70. .
ὁ ὑμεῖς φίλοι μου ἐστέ...
378 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
“Friend of the Emperor” is an official title,1 going back probably in the first place to the language of the court under the successors of Alexander,? and found, for instance, in two inscriptions of the Imperial period at Thyatira.® The parallelism becomes still clearer afterwards if we compare the adjectives φιλοκαῖσαρ and φιλόσέβαστος, “ friend of the Emperor,” which are frequent? in inscriptions, with the similarly formed word φιλόχριστος, “friend of Christ,” which is a favourite with patristic writers,’ or if we compare the extraordinary word seBactoyvworos,® ‘‘ acquainted with the Emperor,’ with the Christian θεόγνωστος,7 “ acquainted with God.”
to. Have the gold coins regained somewhat of their old clearness of definition? Looking back on the parallelism between the cult of Christ and the cult of Caesar, the lines of which might be yet further prolonged, we may say this :
1 Latin amicus Caesaris, Greek φίλος τοῦ Σεβαστοῦ (cf. the two inscriptions from Thyatira), or φίλος τοῦ Καίσαρος, John xix. 12.
2 Cf. Bibelstudien, p. 160; Bible Studies, p. 167 ff. (The note in Bibelstudien, p. 161, Bible Studies, p. 168 f., about John xv. 15 should be cancelled.) J. Leipoldt, Theologisches Literaturblatt, 29 (1908) col. 561, shows that the title is an ancient Egyptian one. W. H. P. Hatch (letter, New York, 2 Dec., 1911) refers me to Cumont, The Oriental Religions in Roman Paganism, Chicago, 1911, p. 137, where examples are given of the title in use at the court of ancient Persia.
3 Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum Nos. 34994, and 3500,.
4 Many examples in Dittenberger, Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae, II. Index, p. 719.
5 φιλόχριστος also made its way among the people, as shown by Christian inscriptions, 6.6 Ὁ. 459, ἢ. 4 below, and one from Zorava in Syria, 22 March, 515 A.D. Dittenberger, Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae, No. 610;. And on the lion cloth from the shrine of St. Anno [Archbishop of Cologne, 1056-75] in the treasury of the church at Siegburg [on the Sieg, which enters the Rhine opposite Bonn] I read: f ἐπὶ ‘Pwpavod καὶ Χριστοφόρου τῶν φιλοχρίστον (sic) δεσποτῶν.
6 Inscriptions from Olbia Ὁ. 200 a.p., Latyschev I. No. 24,; from Panti- capaeum 249 A.D., Latyschev II. No. 46;; from Prusias on the Hypius in Bithynia c. 215 a.D., Bulletin de Correspondance Hellénique, 25 (1901) p. 62 ff. The word receives some explanation from a decree of the Byzantines, rst cent. A.D., Latyschev I. No. 47¢¢,, which boasts ofa citizen of Olbia that μέχρι τᾶς τῶν Σεβαστῶν γνώσεως προκόϊψ]αντος, ‘‘ he had advanced to personal acquaintance with the Augusti (Augustus and Tiberius)’: cf. p. 341, n. τ above. This inscription helps us moreover to understand some yvdors-passages in the N.T. In Phil. iii. 8, for instance, the word does not denote speculative knowledge of Christ, but personal and pneumatic acquaintance with Christ.
7 References in Thesaurus Graecae Linguae and Sophocles’ Greek Lexicon.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 379
it is one of the historical characteristics of Primitive Chris- tianity that it made religion a serious business. Its un- compromisingly religious } character, tolerating no conces- sions to irreligion, is never seen more clearly than when we try to realise the oppressive sensations of contrast that tortured the saints in Christ even in the days of Nero when confronted with the glittering formulae of the cult of the sovereign. :
In fact one abiding result of every really close study of the religious records of the world contemporary with the New Testament is this: they quicken our sense of religion, especially of the simple, vigorous, popular forms of the religion which is seen at work in the.gospel and in the earliest ‘ cult of Christ, and which is still a living force in the New Testament to-day. Our learned forefathers used most - commonly to pursue a retrospective method in their study of the sacred volume, looking backward into the earliest ages of Christianity from the point of view of churchmen and theologians of their own day. They judged the primitive age accordingly; and the New Testament, containing the relics of that age, they conceived and. made use of as the classical textbook of dogma and ethics. But if we approach our sacred Book from the very world that surrounded the New Testament, 1.4. from the Imperial age and from the middle and lower classes of society, then with the same eyes that modern theological prejudices had previously blinded to religion we shall see that the New Testament, really a sacred Book, is not a creature of theology, but of religion. The written memorials of the New Testament age quickened our sense of the characteristics of the popular language, and of the nature of things non-literary, and now they make clear to us the nature of things non-theological.
I speak of course of theology and things theological in the sense that we connect with the words nowadays. If we still felt and appreciated the ancient meaning of the word “ theo- logus,” 2 we might unhesitatingly call the New Testament a theological book; for that would mean practically nothing
1 This side is rightly emphasised by Franz Cumont and Albrecht Dieterich; cf. Bonner Jahrbicher, Heft 108, p. 41. 2 Cf. p. 348 f. above.
380 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
more than that it was a prophetic and religious book. But that was certainly not the meaning of those scholars who laid stress on the theological character of the New Testament. They wanted to display its (in the main) didactic, considered, systematic contents. If religion is to us an inner life in God, theology is scientific consideration about religion and its historical effects. But the considered element in the New Testament falls very much behind the unconsidered naiveté of the purely religious, the prophetic, and the devotional. And though we may be inclined, in the atmosphere of our Western doctrinairism, to spread the grey nimbus of system over the New Testament, the sun of its Anatolian home affords us joyful glimpses of the breadth and depth of that divine strength grown human which streams immeasurable from the confessions in this Anatolian book. The mere paragraphs vanish; personalities rise before us, heroes from the multi- tude of despised and forgotten ones: Elias is come again to prepare the way, then the Anointed of the Lord in His first parusia, and lastly His world-evangelist, St. Paul, and our other Apostolic Fathers.
Like John the Baptist, Jesus of Nazareth is altogether non-theological.1_ He is not a speculative doctrinaire. He is altogether religion, spirit, fire. It would be a mistake to speak of a theological system in the case of Jesus. He never thought out a paragraph, never penried a single tractate. He is so simple that the children cry out with joy at His approach, and the very poorest understand Him. Insignificant persons, unknown by name, who had no idea of the value of literal accuracy, handed on His “ doctrine ’’ in the homely garb of the popular language. Jesus thought nothing of the theology of His age: He even thanks His Father for having hidden His profoundest revelations from the wise and prudent. The lightnings of His prophetic scorn descend upon the theological authorities who paid tithe of mint, and anise, and cummin, but omitted mercy and faith. Contemplative theology, the offspring of doubt, was completely outside the sphere of
1 For what follows cf. my sketch entitled Theologie und Kirche, Tibingen und Leipzig, 1901, p. 6, and two others, Evangelium und Urchristentum,
Minchen, 1905, and Tvagende und stdhlende Kvrafte des Neuen Testaments (presentation volume, ‘‘ Festgabe,” for Julius Kaftan, Tibingen, 1920,
ῬΡ 44~55)-
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 381
His nature, because He was in daily personal intercourse with the higher world, and the living God was in Him. To this latter fact His confessions, His words of controversy, consolation, and reproof bear witness. It is impossible to unite all these sayings into the artistic mosaic of an evan- gelical system: they are the reflection of an inner life full of unbroken strength, full of purity, full of devotion to God and His human family.
Again Paul the Apostle, the other great figure that stands sharply outlined historically at the beginning of our religion, belongs, best part of him, to the age before theology. It is true he is the disciple of a theological school, and as a Christian missionary he not unfrequently makes use of the traditional theological methods. But the tentmaker of Tarsus must not for that reason be numbered with Origen, Thomas Aquinas, and Schleiermacher, but with the herdman of Tekoa, the shoemaker of Gérlitz, and the ribbon-weaver of Miilheim.? Are we really listening to the pulsations of his heart when we hear him interpret allegorically the story of Hagar and Sarah? Are we not infinitely nearer to his soul, his personality, the best that is in him, when we behold him on his knees, crushed, annihilated, and new-created by the grace of His God? His sentences concerning the Law —are they calm, pointed theses from a theological debate, or are they not rather confessions of a tortured and liberated ‘ soul? Is Paul the inventor of a dogma of Christ, or is he not rather the witness of the Christ experienced by him? Is to him the glory of the Living One a theory thought out in the study, or was it not rather flashed upon him in a sacred hour of revelation? Paul the theologian belongs to the history of Rabbinism: his interpretation of Scripture, in which his theology for the most part concentrates, is in no way original or historically distinctive. Paul the theologian vanishes beside Rabban Gamaliel and the other Tanaitic
1 Cf. Theologie und Kirche, p. 6 ff., and my Paulus, Tiibingen, 1911, 21925; St. Paul, London, 1912, 71926.
2 (The prophet Amos is fairly recognisable, but English readers may be reminded that Jakob Béhme, the mystic, 1575-1624, lived and died at Gérlitz, Gerhard Tersteegen, the devotional writer, 1697-1769, at Milheim. The hymn “Thou hidden love of God, whose height,’’ was translated by John Wesley from Tersteegen. TR.]
382 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
fathers.! It is not in the history of theology that Paul is a characteristic figure, but in the history of religion. And there his importance lies essentially in the fact that, being wholly un-rabbinic and wholly pre-dogmatic, he planted the living roots of religion in the to him spiritually present Person of the living Lord Jesus Christ. This he did, not by any new artifices of speculative theology, but by the power of his experience of Christ, from which faith streamed forth ’ with triumphant strength of attraction. From the time of St. Paul there is, not Christology, but a Christolatry recog- nisable as such by the historian of religion 2—a Christianity of Christ. Paul is not like the many Christological specu- lators among us, who attain to the worship of Christ on a Sunday only if they have somehow during the week assured themselves of a Christology.
Primary with St. Paul are his mystic appreciation of Christ, kindled by his experience at Damascus, and the cult of Christ which was quickened at that flame. Out of the mysticism and the cult there springs his contemplation of Christ, which, though occasionally employing the forms of older Messianic dogmatic, is in its whole tone different from later Christological speculation. The subject upon which Christological speculation exercises itself so painfully is Christ as experienced by other people in the past; St. Paul’s contemplation of Christ proceeds from his own experience of Christ and is nourished by the spiritual strength of the present Christ. Doctrinaire Christology looks backward into history as if under some spell; St. Paul’s contemplation of Christ gazes clear-eyed into the future. Christology stands brooding beside an empty grave; St. Paul sees piercingly into a heaven full of the Living Presence. Even the cross, as viewed by the apostle, is not a bald, lifeless “ fact ” in the past, but a portion of the living present. To him there is no such thing as a completed “ work” of Christ: Christ is working still perpetually, and in fact the best is yet to come, for Christ Himself shall come.
1 (The Tanaim, so called from tana, “ to repeat,’’ were the scholars, over 100 in number, who ¢. 10-210 A.D. helped to make the tradition which was finally embodied in the Mishna (‘ repetition,” from shana, “to repeat’). Tr] —
3. St. Paul did not create the cult of Christ; he took it over from the Primitive Church. But the earliest Primitive Apostolic cult of Christ can be traced by us only in very fragmentary lines.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 383
Ultimately, therefore, it is the religious content! that gives its stamp to Primitive Christianity. The Epistle to the Hebrews, being marked by a strongly theological character, with artistic literary form to match,? cannot be assigned to the classical age of Primitive Christianity. Modern scholas- ticism has turned confessions of the inspired into chapters of the learned, and in so doing has worked the same change on the subject-matter of the New Testament as was produced in its form when its non-literary letters were treated as works of literature and its popular language as a sacral variety of Greek. If, however, we approach the sacred Book by way of the ancient world contemporary with it, our preconceptions - vanish.
Far away in the East there rises up before us, higher and higher above the thronging crowd of poor and lowly, a Sacred Form. To His own He is already the Saviour and giver of light ; to the great world He is invisible as yet in the morning twilight, but it too shall one day bow before Him. In His profound intimacy with God and in manly strength of con-
_sciousness of His Messianic mission Jesus of Nazareth is the sheer incarnation of religious inwardness fixed solely on the Kingdom of God, and therefore He is strong to fight and worthy of the highest grace in store for Him—that of being allowed to lay down His life for the salvation of the many.
Not as second beside Him, but_as first after Him and first in Him, stands the great convert in whose ardent soul all the Paschal experiences of the first disciples, with their insistent trend towards a cult of Christ, were focussed. Paul of Tarsus, having experienced in his own person more than any other man the mysteries of the cult of Christ, creates classical forms for their expression, and goes out to the Mediterranean world from which he sprang to gain adherents for the gospel that is being so gloriously extended.
1 It was significant in the history of New Testament scholarship that the venerable Nestor of the subject, Bernhard Weiss, should crown his life-work on the New Testament with a book (1903) entitled Die Religion des Neuen Testaments [Eng. trs. by G. H. Schodde, New York, 1905]. Cf. my notice of the book in the Preussische Jahrbiicher, 134 (1908), p.159f. To investigate the religion of the New Testament remains the last and highest task of every specialist in these studies.
2 Cf. pp. 70 f., 249, 251, above.
384 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
rz. What were the forces enabling this infant cult of Christ to gain its converts? Let us attempt to view the new propagandist religion as it presented itself character- istically to the men of the Hellenistic Mediterranean world.
Our survey of Primitive Christianity on its way from the East can of course take account only of the most strongly marked lines. Microscopic examination is as impossible as when we view some great antique sculpture in relief. We have to step backward; then, and not till then, we see what gave to the propagandist religion of Primitive Christianity its historic character. And so we will not make ten, a dozen, or maybe scores of longitudinal sections through Primitive Christianity, legitimate as such work is in itself, but we will take one single transverse section through Primitive Chris- tianity conceived as a whole and a unity. For even though the religion of the apostles does display an abundance of different personal types, the men of antiquity were influenced first of all not by the abundance of individual elements, but by the style and spirit of the common element.
I have a lively sense of the difficulty we encounter, as men of another epoch, in taking this rapid survey of Primitive Christianity from the point of view of an ancient, and I shall be glad to receive instruction if I have seen wrongly. But to prove that the main result of my inspection is not alto- gether wrong I may mention an observation of mine made after I had myself ventured on that rapid survey. I found that the greatest missionary document in the New Testament, St. Paul’s speech on the Areopagus at Athens,! which aimed at exhibiting to pagans of a great city in the Mediterranean world what was characteristic of the new religion as con- cisely as possible, has selected as characteristic just the very things which seem to us by the aid‘of recent discoveries to be so. The speech is not a verbatim report, but it is no less
certain that it reveals the spirit of St. Paul, and that it is a manifesto of worldwide importance in the history of religions and of religion.
Before pointing out positive characteristics of the ethical and religious order certain preliminary questions must be touched upon.
1 Acts xvii. 22-31.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 385
In the first place we must refer once again to the great fact of social history which has so often engaged our attention in these pages—the popular character of Primitive Christianity. Unless this fact is known and well emphasised it is impossible to explain historically the success of the attractive power of the gospel. St. Paul’s mission was the mission of an artisan, not the mission of a scholar. The gospel call, intelligible to the many because uttered in the popular colloquial language of the world, never implied the social uprooting 1 of anybody by renunciation of his native stratum and elevation to the regions of anaemic theory. On the contrary, we shall see that it only strengthened and ennobled the feeling of solidarity among the humbly situated.
There is one other fact closely connected with this. The characteristic features of the propagandist religion were not contained in separate novel ‘‘ideas.”” The book which most strongly insisted on the supposed novelty of countless “ideas ᾿᾿ and ‘‘ meanings” in the New Testament—I mean Cremer’s Lexicon—has been by reason of this dogmatic tendency one of the greatest hindrances to an_ historical grasp of the real expansive forces of Primitive Christianity. In all that relates to the forms and meanings of words Primitive Christianity is more in contact than in contrast with the surrounding world:
“Christians are distinguished from other men neither by country, nor by language, nor by customs. For nowhere do they inhabit cities of their own, nor do they make use of any exceptional dialect, nor do they practise a con- spicuous mode of life.”
In these words a Christian writer 2 of a very early period, almost contemporary with the New Testament, has sketched for us the intergrowth of his co-religionists with the sur- rounding world.
Nor to the men of antiquity did those features appear characteristically Christian which the common sense of a modern agitator generally seizes upon as the really remark- able thing about the New Testament, and which, modestly
1 1 Cor. vii. 20.
2 Epistle to Diognetus, 5 : Χριστιανοὶ γὰρ οὔτε γῇ οὔτε φωνῇ οὔτε ἔθεσι διακεκρι- μένοι τῶν λοιπῶν εἰσὶν ἀνθρώπων. οὔτε γάρ που πόλεις ἰδίας κατοικοῦσιν οὔτε δια- λέκτῳ τινὶ παρηλλαγμένῃ χρῶνται οὔτε βίον παράσημον ἀσκοῦσιν.
386 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
content to annihilate Christianity by means of common sense alone, he cheerfully proceeds to refute while their no better equipped apologist as excitedly defends them—I mean the miracles. As a matter of fact the miracles gave to the New Testament a singularly popular position in the world around it. The whole ancient world is full of miracles; definite types of miracle become fixed by the tradition of thousands of years and occur again and again in all sorts- of places.1_ Viewed amid the surroundings of its own age and social stratum the New Testament is seen to be shy, rather than otherwise, of narrating miracles.2, With Jesus, St. Paul, and St. John we even find occasionally an ironical attitude towards the popular taste for miracles,? and it is highly significant that the great mass of the sayings of Jesus in the synoptic tradition are not brought into any organic con- nexion with miracles. Nevertheless the New Testament, as it was bound to be, 7s a book of miracles. If, however, we have once grasped historically the nature and necessity. of the miracles in the New Testament, we realise also how dear they are to the heart of the people, how childlike in their piety, how sincerely beautiful, and what high value they can even possess as revelation. But the miracles, as such, have nothing to do with the historical peculiarity of Primitive Christianity.
-First and foremost among the historical characteristics of Primitive Christianity we should rather place that which the theological journalism of our day, as ignorant as it is impious,
1 Much material will be found in Th. Trede, Wunderglaube im Heidentum und in der alten Kirche, Gotha, 1901 (cf. my remarks in Die Christliche Welt, 20 [1906] col. 291 f.); R. Lembert, Dey Wunderglaube bei Réomern und Griechen, I. Teil : Das Wunder bei den rémischen Historikern, Augsburg, 1905; R. Reitz- enstein, Hellenistische Wundeverzdhlungen, Leipzig, 1906 (on aretalogy cf. also my Bibelstudien, Ὁ. 88 ff.; Bible Studies, p. 93 ff.); P. Fiebig, Jiddsche Wundergeschichten’ des neutestamentlichen Zeitalters, Tiibingen, 1911; Rab- binische Wundergeschichten (Lietzmann’s ‘‘ Kleine Texte,’ No. 78), Bonn, 1911; Antike Wundergeschichten (ditto, No. 79), 1911; Hermann Jordan, “Was verstand das 4lteste Christentum unter Wunder ? ” Neue kirchliche Zeitschrift, 23 (1912), p. 589 fi.
8 This point is very properly emphasised by G. Heinrici, Dey littevarische Chavakter dey neutestamentlichen Schriften, p. 41 f.
5 Luke xi. 29 with parallels; Matt. xvi. 1 ff.; 1 Cor. i. 22; 2 Cor. xii. 8 £;
. John iv. 48, xx. 29. :
4 This problem (λόγια and σημεῖα, ‘ sayings and signs’) is in urgent need
of investigation.
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 387
often dares to represent as a perfectly obvious triviality, viz. the One living God. The solemn and impressive presence of the One God pervades the lines of that powerful manifesto on the Areopagus. Not that the world was unprepared for the One God: the Greek thinkers, Plato especially, had pre- pared the way for Him, and the Christian orator speaks thank- fully of certain among their poets who had had vision of the Divine.1 These had been helped by the propaganda of the Greek Jews of the Dispersion with their cosmopolitan Bible.? And now He came, the One and Eternal, on the way pre- pared by Greeks and Jews, ‘came to souls drawn hither and thither by the worship of many gods; to souls restlessly seeking and feeling after Him;* and came as a God who, though Creator and Lord of Heaven and of earth,‘ is yet worshipped without image and without temple,® and is always accessible even to the poorest, in a spiritual presence,®
“ For in Him we live, and move, and have our being.” ?
But the new cult took this One God seriously. No com- promises detracted from the Christians’ faith in God, and in their protest against the deification of the Sovereign they were ready before long to face even martyrdom.
And second we should place the object of the cult in the narrower sense, Jesus Christ, who did not displace the One, but was in the eyes of the worshippers His incarnation. All the preaching of the missionaries was, like the speech on Mars’ Hill,? a preaching of Christ; and every hearer of the missionaries felt that they were introducing the cult of Christ. Of course it was the cult of a Living Person.? The cult of Christ is no feeble meditation upon “ historical ” facts, it is the outcome of pneumatic communion with One Present. The facts of -the past first receive illumination from the heavenly transfiguration of the Present One. But thus illumined they appeal to the souls of those who are touched, thrilling, comforting, transforming, edifying them.
1 Acts xvii. 28.
3. Cf. my sketch Die Hellenisierung des semitischen Monotheismus, Leipzig,
1903. 3 Acts xvii. 27. 4 xvii. 24. 5 xvii. 24 f., 29. 5 xvii. 27. 1 xvii. 28. 8 xvii. 31. xvii. 31.
388 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
The eternal glory of the Divine Child with His Father, His coming down to earth in voluntary self-abnegation and servitude, His life of poverty with the poor, His compassion, His temptations and His mighty works, the inexhaustible riches of His words, His prayers, His bitter suffering and death, and after the cross His glorious Resurrection and return to the Father—all these episodes in the great divine drama, whose peripeteia lay not in hoary antiquity, but had been witnessed a score or so of years ago, were intelligible to every soul, even to the poorest, and particularly to the poorest. And the titles! with which the devotee decked the beloved object of his cult could, many of them, claim domicile in the souls of the poor and the simple: titles such
1 ‘Cult words ”’ these titles may be called, and my choice of this term to describe them was at first dictated solely by my general impression of the earliest Christianity as it would present itself to the historian of worship. That my impression was a right one is strikingly shown by a passage in the Acta Petri (1. p. 68), brought to my notice by Rostalski (letter, Myslowitz, 25 Dec. 1911), where the predication assumes a genuine cult form: “ This Jesus ye have, brethren, the door, the light, the way, the bread, the water, the life, the resurrection, the refreshment, the pearl, the treasure, the seed, the abundance (harvest), the mustard seed, the vine, the plough, the grace, the faith, the word : he is all things and there is none other greater than he. Unto him be praise, world without end. Amen.” [The Vercelli Acts, ch. 20, as translated by Montague Rhodes James, The Apocryphal New Testament, Oxford, 1924, p. 322; where, however, pearl is misprinted feast;, but see p. 268, Acts of John 109, the passage which ‘‘ Peter’’ was copying. ΤῊ. (Rostal- ski conjectures that plough (in the Latin avatrum) probably arose from ἀρότην, ‘‘ plougher,”’ in the original.) [But we have “ the plough, the net ”’ in Acts of John 109. ΤῈ. Cf. also Irenaeus, Contva haeveses, Migne, 7, 540 ff. These cult words have, in the sphere of unaffected contemplation purely for purposes of worship, again and again been recognised as such, and have been assembled in similar sequences, as shown for instance by the Moravian Hymn-book of the year 1900, No. 749, verse 4: ‘‘ Er ist unser Hirte, Haupt und Konig,/ Schépfer, Bruder, Herr und Freund,/Hilf und Rat und Trost und Fried’ und Freude,/Schutz und Habe, Leben, Licht und Weide,/Hoherpriester, Opferlamm,/unser Gott und Bradutigam.” (Quoted from the Tdgliche Losungen und Lehrtexte dey Briidergemeine, 1914, p. 102.) A little English book, Ada R. Habershon’s The New Testament Names and Titles of the Lord of Glory, London, 1910, likewise exemplifies this contemplation carried out purely as an act of worship. [An obvious illustration for English readers would be John Newton’s Olney hymn, ‘‘ How sweet the Name of Jesus sounds ” (1779): ‘‘ Jesus! my Shepherd, Husband, Friend,/My Prophet, Priest, and King,/My Lord, my Life, my Way, my End,/Accept the praise I bring.” The German quoted runs almost like this: ‘‘ He to us is Shepherd, Head and Monarch,/Maker, Brother, Lord and Friend,/Help and Counsel, Comfort, Peace and Pleasure, /Life and Light, and Pasture, Guard and Treasure,/High Priest, Lamb of Offering, /God and Bridegroom, thus we sing.” ΤᾺ]
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 389
as Lamb of God, the Crucified, Shepherd and Chief Shepherd,! Corner Stone, Door and Way, the Corn of Wheat, Bread and Vine, Light and Life, Head and Body, Alpha and Omega, Witness, Mediator arid’ Judge, Brother, Son of Man, Son of God, Word of God and Image of God, Saviour, High Priest, Lord, King. Unfathomable in intellectual content, giving. scope to every variety of personal Christian experience and every motive of self-sacrificing obedience, this series contains not a single title that was likely to impress by mere sacer- dotal associations or unintelligibleness. In the same way the gospel tradition of worship, with its sturdy, popular tone, was far superior to the fantastic, hysterical mythologies of the other cults, which piled one stimulant on another. So too the celebration of the mysteries of Christ required no magnificent temple or awe-inspiring cavern: it could take place wherever two or three were gathered together in His name. All great movements in the history of our race have been determined by conditions of the heart of the people, not by intellect. The triumph of the cult of Christ over all other cults—the point must here be once more emphasised— is in no remote degree explainable by the fact that from the first Christianity took deep root in the heart of the many, in the hearts of men and women, old and young, bond and free, Jews, Greeks, and Barbarians.* In its early days Christianity made conquest of hearts not because it was a “religion of redemption,” as people are fond of saying nowadays, substituting the impersonal for the personal,—but because it was the cult of a Redeemer. : The Primitive Christian cult of Christ was. preserved from doctrinaire congelation not only by the tendency to realise daily the presence of the living Master, but—and this is the third characteristic feature—by the expectation of His second parusia and the hope of Eternity that grew therefrom. The climax of the speech on the Areopagus was a proclamation of the approaching Last Judgment.* This is not the simple extension of the belief in immortality which had long been
1 Cf. pp. 99 ff. above.
2 The popular universality of the cult of Christ is reflected by such passages of St. Paul’s writings as Gal. iii. 28, Col. iii. 11, 1 Cor. xii. 13.
3 Acts xvii. 31.
390 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
quickening here and there in men’s hearts; it is a clamping together of the fortunes of this world with the future of the Kingdom of God such as probably no other religion could show. Not only were souls upheaved and brought to a state of tense excitement, but consciences were filled with profound earnestness.
And that is the last feature: the moral earnestness of Christianity. The moral element is not a foreign body within the cult, still less is if external to the sacred precinct ; it is indivisibly united with the religion and the cult—indeed, far from being ruled out by the mystical element, it receives from the communion with Christ the strongest encourage- ments. No artist versed in things of the soul, whether of the earlier or of the subsequent period,—not Sophocles, nor Augustine, nor Dante, nor Shakespeare, nor Goethe has succeeded in disclosing deeper depths of guilty consciousness than the apostolic pastors found in themselves. No one has borne more convincing testimony concerning personal responsibility, ‘the necessity of inward regeneration and reconciliation with God, than the missionaries whom the Spirit of Jesus Christ impelled through the world. The organic connexion of religion with morality, which from the first formed part of the essence of Christianity, and might be experienced anew daily in the realisation of the presence of God and of Christ, was intelligible even to a plain man when next to love of God love of one’s neighbour was demanded, and next to fellowship with Christ the following after Him. Moreover, the organisations of the earliest churches were visible embodiments of such social ethics as fairly filled the soul of ancient man with enthusiasm. The idea of the unity of the human race, classically expressed in the speech on the Areopagus,! united with St. Paul’s preaching of the Body of Christ to strengthen and ennoble the feeling of solidarity which then, as the inscriptions have shown, pervaded the lower orders of society like a healthy arterial current and had led to the formation of numerous guilds 2 among the common people. In the “ assemblies ”
1 Acts xvii. 26.
* The literature relating to ancient guilds (including religious guilds) is
well summarised in Schiirer, Geschichte des jtidischen Volkes, 111.8 p. 62 ff. (Cf. E. V. Arnold, ‘‘ Roman Trade Societies,’’ Discovery 1 (1920) 55 ff. Tr.]
SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS HISTORY 391
of the Christians, which were doubtless looked upon as guilds of Christ 1 by the men of the time, that brotherhood which proved itself effectual by charitable gifts dispatched over land and sea took shape. Considered even from the general point of view of social history they were probably the most vigorous organisations, and the richest in inspiration, of the whole Imperial period. We must never forget that for them those pages were penned whose remains were afterwards saved from destruction in the New Testament. A cult in whose conventicles a prayer like the Lord’s Prayer could be offered and an ethical text be read such as the 13th chapter of r Corinthians, simple in form as it is mighty in ethos, possessed powers of gaining converts which were irresistible.
12. The paean of love chanted under Nero at Ephesus for the poor saints of Corinth has not perished with Corinth. Annihilated for ever, the magnificence of Nero’s Corinth lies buried to-day beneath silent rubbish-mounds and green vineyards on the terraces between the mass of the Acro- corinthus and the shore of the shining Gulf: nothing but ruins, ghastly remnants, destruction. The words of that paean, however, have outlasted the marble and the bronzes of the Empire, because they had an unassailable refuge in the secret depths of the soul of the people. The Corinthian Christians, who suffered other writings of St. Paul to be lost, preserved these; copies were taken and circulated; at the turning-point of the first and second century 1 Corinthians was already.known at Rome,? and probably St. Paul’s other letters were also in circulation then in the Christian con- gregations of the great Mediterranean coast-cities, guarded with the gospels and other texts of the fathers as an heirloom and treasure, separated from the false texts, becoming more and more identified with the books, and finally incorporated in the Book of the sacred writings of the New Testament.
Without shutting our eyes to the dangers that lay in the Book when it came to be judged as a book, we may never-
1 Cf. the works (quoted by Schiirer, op. cit., p.-62) of Georg Heinrici, who was the first to point out this analogy with proper emphasis.
2 [It is quoted by Clement of Rome in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, 6.96 a.D. TR.]
302 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
theless confess that this Book of the New Testament has remained the most valuable visible possession of Christendom, down to the present day. .
A book from the ancient East, and lit up by the light of the dawn,—a book breathing the fragrance of the Galilean spring, and anon swept by the shipwrecking north-east tempest from the Mediterranean,—a book of peasants, fishermen, artisans, travellers by land and sea, fighters and martyrs,—a book in cosmopolitan Greek with marks of Semitic origin,—a book of the Imperial age, written at Antioch, Ephesus, Corinth, Rome,—a book of pictures, miracles, and visions,—book of the village and the town, book of the people and the peoples,—the New Testament, if regard be had to the inward side of things, is the great book, chief and singular, of human souls.
Because of its psychic depth and breadth this book of the East is a book for both East and West, a book for humanity: a book ancient but eternal.
And because of the figure that emerges from the book— the Redeemer, accompanied by the multitude of the redeemed, blessing and consoling, exhorting and renewing, revealing Himself anew to every generation of the weary and heavy- laden, and growing from century to century more great— the New Testament is the Book of Life.
CHAPTER V RETROSPECT—FUTURE WORK OF RESEARCH
1. ABouT mid-day on Easter Sunday, 1906, at Ephesus, I was crossing in company with Friedrich von Duhn and other friends a wildly luxuriant field of acanthus on our way from the Library of Celsus to the luncheon tent hospitably erected for us by the Austrians, when my eye fell on an antique marble acanthus capital that lay to the left of the path completely embedded in the thick, exuberant greenery of living acanthus leaves.
That little episode kept recurring to my mind, and its symbolism revealed itself afterwards when, as we sailed the waters of Crete and the Cyclades, we found leisure to meditate upon what we had seen. ;
The contrast between the conventionalised marble acanthus leaves and their verdant wild originals seemed to me an image of the contrast between the methods of research characteristic of my own special studies. _
On the one hand the method which conventionalises the New Testament by isolating and canonising its language, by turning its non-literary texts into literature and its religious confessions into hard and stony dogma ;—on the other hand the method which takes possession in the work-room of every- one who studies the New Testament historically and psycho- logically as the ancient East at large can and must be studied at the present day.
This method does not look upon the New Testament as a museum of statues in marble and bronze, but as a spacious garden, God’s garden, thriving in luxurious growth under the spring sunshine of the East. No painter can reproduce the pale green of its young fig-leaves and the blood-red of its Easter anemones; the sombre melancholy of its olive groves, the gentle tremor of its vine tendrils cannot be described;
304 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
and in the sacred precinct, where for the pure a fountain of living water springs beneath primeval cedars, the solemn silence bids the surveyor avaunt who had approached with line and measuring staff.
Some day, when yet stronger waves of light come flooding over to us from the East, it will be recognised that the restora- tion of the New Testament to its native home, its own age and social level, means something more than the mere repatria- tion of our sacred Book. It brings with it new life and depth to all our conceptions of Primitive Christianity. But already perhaps we may say that when theologians engage in the study of inscriptions, papyri, and ostraca of the Imperial period, their work is not the pastime of cranks, but is justified by the imperious demands of the present state of scholarship. For a long time the theologians were content to don the cast-off garments of the philologists, and to drag with them through the New Testament critical methods that had long been given up by the masters of the scientific study of antiquities, until they fairly dropped to pieces. Are we now to wait another twenty years, and then go limping after the philologists, who by that time will have struck still better sources? Or shall we not rather, undeterred by the absurd and deprecia- tory remark about being ‘“‘ mere” philologists, ourselves lay hands on the mighty mass of material for research that a bountiful Providence has bestowed on our unworthiness ?
In particular, the one great historical fact which must be recognised if a man is to be either a good exegetist and systematist or a good preacher and pastor—the fact of the close inward connexion between the gospel and the lower classes—cannot be realised by visionary speculation, however ingenious, working solely upon the commonplaces of obsolete monographs. Such knowledge must be deciphered and pain- fully deduced from the thousands and tens of thousands of lines of torn and. mangled writing newly recovered from the age of the New Testament. Albert Kalthoff 1 was certainly a gifted writer, and he certainly had a heart for the lower
1 [The Bremen pastor (1850-1906). TR.] Author of Das Christusproblem. Grundlinien zu einer Sozialtheologie, Leipzig, 1902, 71903; Die Entstehung des Christentums, Jena, 1904 [translated by Joseph McCabe under the title, The Rise of Christianity, London, 1907. TR.]; Was wissen τοῖν von Jesus ? Schmargendorf-Berlin, 1904.
RETROSPECT—FUTURE WORK OF RESEARCH 395
orders of the people, but he was not fitted to be the historian or even the historical philosopher of the origins of our faith, and his attempt to democratise Primitive Christianity was doomed to failure because he had not by the tedious process of detailed work made himself at home among the mass of humanity in- the Imperial period. Instead of investigating the real psyche of the masses and ultimately discovering within the masses the leading personalities who made the individual to be an individual indeed and raised him out of the masses, Kalthoff and his works ended like an unhappy “ stickit minister ” 1—with a witches’ sabbath of homeless ideas.”
2. The method of research suggested by the new texts is valuable also in tracing the later history of Christianity. I merely mention the fact, and may be allowed to refer to the hints given in Chapter III., in the course of interpreting certain early Christian letters emanating from the lower classes. Even when Christianity had risen from the workshop and the cottage to the palace and the schools of learning, it did not desert the workshop and the cottage. The living roots of Christianity remained in their native soil—the lower ranks of society—and regularly in the cycle of the years, when autumn had gathered the topmost leaves and the dry boughs had snapped beneath the storms of winter, the sap rose upward and woke the buds from slumber, with promise of
1 [German, wie ein missvatener Stiftley, ‘‘ like an unsuccessful alumnus of the (Tabingen) Seminary.” The Protestant Seminary or ‘‘ Stift ” at Tubingen, founded in 1537, has a very high reputation and is recruited from the pick of the schools of Wiirttemberg. F.C. Baur and D. F. Strauss (the theologians}, F. T. Vischer (writer on aesthetic), Eduard Zeller (the philosopher), and MGrike (the poet) were among its distinguished pupils. But of course there are also failures. TR.]
2 Karl Kautsky’s theory must be similarly criticised: Dey Urvsprung des Christentums. Eine historische Untersuchung, Stuttgart, 1908. Cf. my review in Die Hilfe 125 (1909), p. 123, translated in Appendix XI below; also Hans Windisch, Der messianische Krieg und das Urchristentum, Tibingen, 1909; Rudolf Leonhard, Einige Betrachtungen iiber Religion und Wirtschaft (im Anschluss an K. Kautskys “‘ Ursprung des Christentums ’’), Archiv fir Geschichte des Sozialismus, 8, p. 116 ff.; but particularly the ripe judgments of Ernst Troeltsch, inspired by real familiarity with the modern scientific study of antiquity, Die Soztallehren der christlichen Kirchen und Gruppen, Tiibingen, 1912; ‘‘anastatic”’ reprint, 1919, p. 1 ff. See moreover pp. 7 ff. above, and Ernst Lohmeyer, Soziale Fragen im Urchristentum, Leipzig, 1921.
396 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST |
blossom and rich days of fruitage.1 Jesus the carpenter and Paul the tentmaker mark the beginnings, and again at the most momentous crisis in the history of later Christianity there comes another homo novus in the person of Luther, the miner’s son and peasant’s grandson.
The history of Christianity, with all its wealth of incident, has been treated much too often as the history of the Christian literary upper class, the history of theologians and ecclesiastics, schools, councils, and parties, whereas Christianity itself has often been most truly alive in quarters remote from councils and outside the polemical tractates of Protestant zealots. One great merit of the book on German Church History in the nineteenth century by Christian Tischhauser,? lecturer at the Bale Missionary College,® is that it takes account of undercurrents which are usually ignored either because they erect themselves no literary monuments, or because the humble literature produced by them is overwhelmed, if it ever survives the day for which it was written, and crowded out into the worst-lighted rooms of the b:bliotheca christiana by the collected works of writers on academic Christianity and church politics.
From gospel times down to our own day Christian piety, simple and vigorous, has been most alive in the middle and lower classes. There its own popular forms of expression were created and its own popular types of personality were experienced. To investigate the laws determining the forma- tion of these expressions, to study the psychology of the inner life of spontaneous Christian piety, is a task of great charm and value to the scholar and an absolutely indispensable
1 Since writing the above I have come across the following beautiful quotation from Raabe’s Hungerpastor in a review by Wilhelm Kosch (Deutsche Literaturzeitung, 29 [1908] col. 2826) of August Sauer’s Litevaturgeschichte und Volkskunde, Prag, 1907, a book with an important bearing on our subject, as regards the methods to be employed. Raabe says: ‘‘ The deliverers of humanity rise from the depths, and as the springs of water come from the depths to make the land fruitful, so the field of humanity is perpetually being refreshed from the depths.” [Wilhelm Raabe (1831-1910) published his most characteristic novel, Der Hungerpastoy, in 1864. TR.]
2 Geschichte der evangelischen Kirche Deutschlands in der ersten Halfte des 19. Jahrhunderts, Basel, 1900. See the important review of the book by W. Walther, Theologisches Literaturblatt, 21 (1900) col. 282.
3 It is no mere accident that this task should haye been taken up by one connected .with missionary work.
RETROSPECT—FUTURE WORK OF RESEARCH 397
pre-requisite in the training of a popular pastorate. The
- training of our candidates for the ministry is as a rule far too scholastic for the actual work they are called upon to do in practice. Most of us criticise the forms of expression chosen ‘by popular Christianity in the past and in the present, much as Blass did the letter written by the bad boy Theon 1—as if it were a case of degeneration. There are very few people, for instance, who can enter into sympathetic relation with the popular art of the Catacombs and with the naiveté, true- hearted as it often is, of the early Christian popular literature that has come down to us in the remains of “‘ apocryphal” gospels and acts of apostles. Deluded by the belief that there is no value except in things that have really happened and can be proved to have happened, we cast out the miracles in these popular books, and with them the books themselves, upon the dust-heap.
As a matter of fact, however, the child Jesus healing the woodman who had been injured by the falling axe,? and the Jesus who restores the withered hand of a stonemason,® are striking proofs of the intenseness of the confidence with which the various handicrafts did homage to the carpenter’s Son, each in its own place of work. We know how it will be: to shepherds He will. become the Chief Shepherd, to sailors the steersman, to travellers the guide, to soldiers the com- mander; He will bless the seed for the peasants, and He will sit at table with us, a daily invited guest, in the breaking of bread.
3. Thus I have already been led to speak of the work in store for research. Further to speak on this subject is at the same time easy and yet difficult forme. Itis easy because I believe I can discern problems in plenty, because I am con-
1 Cf. p. 201, above.
2 Cf. p. 41, n. 3 above.
3 Special addition in the Gospel according to the Hebrews to Matt. xii. τὸ and parallels. [See M. R. James, The Apocryphal New Testament, Oxford, 1924, pp. 4,5. TR]
4 Of course I speak here only of problems connected with the subject of this book. For other New Testament problems see the programme suggested in an important work by Johannes Weiss, Die Aufgaben der neutestamentlichen Wissenschaft in der Gegenwart, Gottingen, i908; and Paul Fiebig, Die Aufgaben der neutestamentlichen Forschung in dey Gegenwart, Leipzig, 1909.
398 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
vinced that*they must be solved, and because I would fain regard a humble fraction of them as filling a part of my own life. On the other hand I find it difficult to speak of problems, because to do so is to speak of things unfinished. It raises a vision of books by the dozen lying open upon one another, of hundreds of written slips and sheets of MS., of library dust and work done by artificial light on dull days, of hopes raised only to be dashed, and of the investigator’s sorry bartering day after day a single problem solved for ten others unsolved. This last part of my book is difficult more especially because I know that what the student strives to attain is something
- great, whereas what he actually does attain will be but the poor work of man after all, and by speaking. of the great thing too soon he awakens expectations which he cannot fulfil.} But this, I take it, is the fate, and I do not hesitate to say the happy fate, of all real research, showing how closely akin it is to the work of the artist : its powers must be strengthened by struggling towards an ideal which is unattainable, because ideal, but which nevertheless always remains the goal to be attained.
The most obvious task has reference to the written records themselves. As many new texts as possible must be discovered and published with all care.
The period of excavations for papyri in Egypt is by no means ended, and many workers are still required for the systematic collection and preservation of the despised ostraca.
New editions of the inscriptions on stone, metal, etc. are, as was shown in the first chapter, in active preparation on a large scale. But the amount of inscriptions still lying under- ground or built into the walls of mediaeval and modern edifices is beyond computation; the lime-kilns fortunately have not
1 In preparing this new edition I find it particularly hard, for an obvious reason, to speak once more of problems for the future. When I first did so, in 1908 and 1909, I was able to hope sub conditione Jacobea [James. iv. 15 TR.] that I might have myself solved some portion of these problems by the beginning of the nineteen-twenties. The fate that overtook the world in 1914 forced me, however, for full seven years upon another path, the path taken in my Evangelischer Wochenbrief (1914-1921) of working for international understanding and enlightenment through the churches. This led me spirit- ually, it is true, deeper than ever before into the N.T., but I was obliged to lay aside much of the work on the N.T. to which my life as a scholar had been devoted. Cf. Evangelischer Wochenbrief III No. 92/104 (Nov. 1921) p. 275 f.
RETROSPECT—FUTURE WORK OF RESEARCH 399
swallowed up everything. The remark may be added that, whereas the acquisition of new texts, especially where excava- tions have to be made, is largely a question of funds, the comparatively small sums with which before 1914 it was possible to accomplish so much to-day count for nothing. The appeal must be made to government authorities and private benefactors to recognise and meet this pressing need, from which research, especially under the conditions at present prevailing in Germany, is suffering.
The next duty of scholars is to discuss the texts scientifically’ in their bearings on language, literature, religious and general social history. Editors ought to facilitate this discussion: by making the arrangement of the printed texts as convenient and clear as possible. There should be no false shame about providing (always, if possible) translations of the texts; many hidden difficulties first show themselves, even to the specialist, when he really begins to translate sentence by sentence.
Of the many individual problems which the new texts can help to solve there are some to which I would call special attention. The types of popular narrative style must be traced throughout the extent of the ancient civilisations, particularly the following: narratives of miracles,! accounts of healing and deliverance from danger,? narratives of expia- tion,? dreams, visions, travellers’ tales of adventure, and stories of martyrdom. The history of ancient letter-writing, accompanied by careful reconstruction of autograph letters and fragments, must be continued further with special attention to the formal phraseology which is of such import- ance in problems of chronology. The letters and allied texts must moreover be interpreted as reflections of the family life and soul-life of antiquity, particularly with the object of investigating the emotions at work among the lower classes. All the resources of ancient folklore are to be pressed into the service of this research: it is not to be a mere collection of curiosities enabling us to feel the contrast between ourselves and antiquity; it must be reconstitutive psychology of the
1 Cf. the works of Reitzenstein and others mentioned at p. 386, n. 1 above.
2 (Cf. p. 179, n. 7, 8 above, and Index IV., s.v. Narratives. Tr.]
3 Hints in Buresch, Aus Lydien, p. 111 ff., and especially in Steinleitner, Die Beicht.
400 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
people, enlightening us as to our permanent contact with antiquity.
4. Most of these problems, no doubt, will find their solution beyond the pale of the Faculties of Theology, although the hard-and-fast divisions between the guilds of learning have vanished here and there, and are still vanishing, greatly to the advantage of research. But there will be quite enough for the theologians todo. The tasks presented to us may be summed up in a single sentence: We have to establish, with the aid of the authentic records of the ancient world, the positive position, based on social history and psychology, on which scholarship may take its stand for the study of the New Testament. The one-sided method of retrospection, which has too often blinded us to religion by its insistence on dogma, must give way to inquiries concerning the history of religion and the psychology of religion. That is the motto, as it were, and in it more stress is to be laid than usual upon the word religion. The study of purely religious texts—manifestations of piety that certainly did not proceed from learned medita- tion—must inevitably open our eyes to the living piety with which the New Testament is instinct.
These historical and psychological inquiries will lead on to a new problem, the solution of which has an equally important bearing on the detailed exegesis and on the collective criticism of the classical texts of Christianity, viz. the problem of defin- ing the various types of religious production within the. New Testament. What many have taken to be one vast expanse of neutral tint will be seen to be a harmionious succession of
1 Including, of course, the authentic records of ancient Judaism and the other Semitic religions, of which we had not to speak in the present context. [An illustration after the author’s own heart, showing the persistence of the great ideas among simple folk of all ages, occurred on 12 March, 1923, when The Times, reviewing (on p. 13) Egyptian Hievatic Papyri, Second Series, published by the British Museum, quoted, among other striking proofs of the personal religion of Amenemapt, a moralist of the 18th dynasty, the saying: ‘Though the tongue of a man steers the boat, it is God who is the captain thereof.” The Daily News of the same day reported the arrival of the trawler “ Sargon ”’ at Grimsby with her crew of 12, for whom memorial services had been held when the ship was given up for lost. The German trawler « Schleswig Holstein’ had towed them to safety when they were storm-tossed, without fuel to make steam, and without food. ‘‘ Theve was only one man in charge, and that was God,”’ said the skipper of the ‘‘ Sargon.”’ .Tr.]
RETROSPECT—FUTURE WORK OF RESEARCH 401
the most varied shades of colour. What injustice, for instance, has been done to the great Evangelist, St. John, by demanding from him a “ progress of thought ” in the speeches of Jesus in his gospel, and a “‘ consecutive plan ” in his epistle,! as if his were a doctrinaire, a systematic nature. St. John has no liking for progress along an unending straight road; he loves a circling flight, like his symbol, the eagle. There is something hovering and brooding about his production; repetitions are in no wise abnormal with him, but the marks of a mystic cult- contemplation which he cherishes as a precious inheritance from St. Paul and further intensifies. The other types of religious production may be worked out with the same clear- ness of definition—Jesus most certainly, Paul also, and the rest of the seers, consolers, and evangelists.
In far higher degree than is possible to any kind of dogmatist exegesis, the historical and psychological exegesis will help us to understand why the cult of Christ was destined to mark the turning-point in the world’s religion. And the forces of inward life which this exegetical method sets free once more in the New Testament will bring forth fruit in quite another manner in our own generation, bestowing refresh- ment on the weary and heavy-laden (not on the well-filled and the bored) to-day as on the first day.
5. Finally, among the multitude of particular problems there _ 1s one which may be specially selected as probably the most important task of New Testament research at the present time, viz. the preparation of a new Lexicon to the New Testament.
A lexicon is only another name for a dictionary. A dictionary, most people would say, is a very simple thing—a book containing foreign words in alphabetical order, with their English meanings. So there is nothing remarkable about it, nothing remarkably learned or scientific; it is in the first place a business enterprise, a book to meet the requirements of practical life, ranking with Bradshaw and the Post Office Directory : a portly volume perhaps, but its inside merits more dependent on the printer than on the author; the chief thing is to find a publisher, and all the rest will follow. Memory reverts, perhaps, to our schooldays. That awful
1 [I.e., 1 John. Τα]
402 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
passage in Caesar, where he describes how he bridged the Rhine—how unintelligible it all was, until we looked up the hard words in the dictionary and saw in an instant what each one of them “ meant.” Nothing could have been simpler for a boy who knew his A B C and had the gumption to look for trabs under the letter T.
If there is a tendency in some quarters to despise dictionaries as “‘ unscientific,” there exists a no less widespread tendency to bow slavishly to their pronouncements. “It is in the dictionary, so it must be right ’’—that is the spoken or unspoken thought in innumerable cases where a person hurriedly consults the dictionary to settle the meaning of a foreign word.
The scientific attitude towards lexicography begins the minute we learn that the meaning of a given word cannot always be got straight from the dictionary, that every word presents a problem in itself, and that we have no right to speak scientifically about a word until we know its history, i.e. its origin, its meaning, and how meanings have been multiplied by division or modification.
Scientific lexicography undertakes, therefore, to reconstruct the history of words from the earliest times to which our sources go back, in fact from the primitive prehistoric period of the language which comparative philology establishes theoretically, down to the time when we find the words spoken or written by a given individual.
Hence it follows that lexicography, in spite of many techni- cal appendages, in spite of the fact that the customary alphabetical arrangement of words is dictated by practical and technical, and not by scientific considerations; is after all one of the historical sciences. It compiles the historical statistics of the language.
Lexicography in this sense is still a young science. Lexicons were first made thousands of years ago, dictionaries on his- torical principles not until the nineteenth century. As examples I may mention two of the latest big dictionaries, which are still incomplete: the Egyptian Dictionary prepared by the Berlin Academy of Sciences, and the Thesaurus Linguae Latinae,1 a great Latin Dictionary which has the joint support of a number of associated Academies.
1 Cf. the Hamburg address by Hermann Diels quoted below, p. 404, n. 2.
RETROSPECT—FUTURE WORK OF RESEARCH 403
A Thesaurus Graecae Linguae also exists, and has often been cited in this book. It is a costly work in nine huge folios, but it by no means fulfils the requirements of scientific lexicography,1 and it is altogether out of date. The same may be said of all Greek dictionaries whatever, even of the ‘Great Lexicon ’”’ 2 published at Athens, which is only great, and not a lexicon at all. There is probably no department of classical philology in so backward a state at the present day as this of Greek lexicography. There is not a single manual Greek lexicon which takes adequate account of the great advances that have been made in etymology,? or of semasio- logical problems, or of the enormous additions to our statistical materials furnished by the new texts,‘ though it is to be hoped the new edition of Franz Passow’s old Lexicon begun by Wilhelm Crénert ὅ will mark the beginning of an improvement.
1 Information on the history and requirements of Greek lexicography will be found most conveniently in Leopold Cohn’s appendix on the subject contributed to Karl Brugmann’s Griechische Grammatik,’ Minchen, 1900.—A very useful book is Hermann Schone, Repertorium griechischer Worterver- zeichnisse und Speziallexika, Leipzig, 1907.
2 Meya Λεξικον τῆς Βλληνικης Γλωσσης Avectn Kwvotavrindov, ev Αθηναις, 190I~10 (4 volumes).
3 A good beginning among lexicons for school use has been made by Her- mann Menge, Griechisch-Deutsches Schulwérterbuch, Berlin, 1903.—For the scientific lexicographer the most important works are Walther Prellwitz, Etymologisches Wérterbuch dey Griechischen Sprache,*? Gottingen, 1905, and Emile Boisacq, Dictionnaive etymologique de la langue grecque, Heidelberg and Paris, 1907-1916.
4 In recent years H. van Herwerden, following an example set by others, has done most towards collecting the new details (Lexicon Graecum Supple- torium et Dialecticum, Lugduni Batavorum, 1902, τοῖο; Appendix Lexici Graeci . . ., Lugd. Bat., 1904; Nova Addenda .. . in the Mélanges Nicole, Genéve, 1905, p. 241 ff.; second edition of the whole work, 1910. A great advancement is to be expected from the Wérterbuch der griechischen Papyrusur- kunden mit Einschluss der griechischen Inschriften, Aufschriften, Ostraka, Mumienschilder usw. aus Agypten, vol. I (A-K), Heidelberg and Berlin, 1924- 25, vol. II, Berlin, 1925-, which is being prepared by Friedrich Preisigke (t1924) and Emil Kiessling, with the support of the Heidelberg Academy, the Strassburg Wissenschaftliche Gesellschaft and private friends. I have already (p. 21 above) called attention to the extreme importance of Moulton and Milligan’s Vocabulary.
5 Passows Worterbuch dey griechischen Sprache, vollig neu bearbeitet von Wilhelm Crénert, parts 1-3, Gottingen, 1912 ff. Cf. my review, Theologische Literatur-Zeitung 38 (1913) col. 614f. [Since the interruption of his great work by the war Crénert has lent generous aid to an English undertaking which, though smaller, is likely to cost altogether nearly £20,000: A Greek-English Lexicon compiled by H. G. Liddell and R. Scott. A new edition... by Henry Stuart Jones . . . with the assistance of Roderick McKenzie. Parts I, II: Α---διαλέγω, Oxford, 1925-6. Eight more parts willcomplete the work. It contains less etymology than the old Liddell and Scott, but a greatly increased
404 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
The fact that our present lexicons hardly ever suggest an opening for learned discussion, and hardly ever hint at the existence of open questions, gives them a more dogmatic than scientific character.
The problems that modern lexicography is called upon to solve have been illustrated in a masterly manner by Hermann Diels in the case of a single word,! and the same authority has elsewhere shown how impossible it would be to carry out the gigantic proposals for a new Greek Thesaurus.* The expenses preceding publication, he estimated in 1905, would amount to £500,000; the work would extend to 120 volumes, and the probable selling price of this monster would be £300. Instead of one single-comprehensive lexicon it would be more advisable, he suggested, to compile about ten separate lexicons.
One of these great lexicons would have to deal with the whole of the Biblical and early ecclesiastical writings, both literary and non-literary, beginning with the Septuagint Bible and extending over the New Testament to the Gréek Fathers—not in order to isolate these texts linguistically once again, but for the sake of their inner relationship and congruity.
vocabulary of the language down to the reign of Justinian. Among the voluntary helpers are P. Jouguet, V. Martin, and H. I. Bell for papyri, and M. N. Tod for inscriptions. If words from Patristic writers are intentionally omitted by the revisers, this is partly because a ‘‘ Lexicon of Patristic Greek,” the idea of which originated with the Central Society of Sacred Study, and its Warden, Dr. H. B. Swete, has long been in preparation in England. It is hoped that this may be published, when the Liddell and Scott is completed, under the editorship of Dr. Darwell Stone. TRr.]
1 Elementum : Eine Vorarbeit zum griechischen und lateinischen Thesaurus, Leipzig, 1899. Cf. Theologische Literaturzeitung, 26 (1901) col. 1 ff.
2 Der lateinische, griechische und deutsche Thesaurus, Bericht, erstattet auf der Hamburger Philologenversammlung [1905], Neue Jahrbiicher fiir das klas- sische Altertum etc. 1905, I. p. 689 ff. The question of the Greek Thesaurus is further discussed by Paul Kretschmer, Der Plan eines Thesaurus der griechi- schen Sprache, Glotta, Vol. I. pp. 339-348.—A plan has been set on foot in Greece for a great historical lexicon of the Greek language from the earliest times down to the present day; cf. Karl Krumbacher, Internationale Wochen- schrift, 2 (1908) 19 December, and 3 (1909) 29 May; also Krumbacher’s essay in lexicography, KTHTQP, Strassburg, 1909 (an offprint from vol. 25 of the Indogermanische Forschungen); further, Internationale Wochenschrift 5 (1911) No, 5, Munich letter. [It seems likely that Krumbacher’s suggestion (Byzantinische Zeitschrift 18 [1909] 708 ff.) will be adopted, and that only a lexicon of the later Greek language will be attempted. So far the publication ofan ᾿Αρχεῖον, which comes out as a series of supplementary volumes of ᾽Αθηνᾶ, has been the result, TR.]
Fic. 73.—Onomasticon sacrum. Papyrus from Egypt, 3rd or 4th cent. a.p. Now in the University Library, Heidelberg.
RETROSPECT—FUTURE WORK OF RESEARCH 405
First, however, there is much preliminary work to be done for this Thesaurus of Biblical and Christian Greek. The chief thing is to place the lexicography of the Septuagint and of the New Testament on the new foundations afforded by the vocabulary of the contemporary world as we have it in the inscriptions, papyri, etc.; and the practical needs of Biblical students suggest that at the present time the more necessary of these two special tasks is the production of a revised New Testament Lexicon which shall promote the work of research without ceasing to be valuable for purposes of study.
The lexicography of the Greek Bible can look back upon a venerable history. Philo of Alexandria, the contemporary of Jesus and St. Paul, was in all probability the author of a work explaining the Hebrew names in the Septuagint, which was afterwards used by Origen and St. Jerome. Portions of this earliest lexical tradition made their way among the Christian common people at an early date, as is shown by a precious papyrus fragment ! of the 3rd or 4th century A.D. (Figure 73) from Egypt, now in the Heidelberg University. Library. This fragment—one of the few quite early Christian relics extant—is inscribed, probably for use as an amulet, with powerful and comforting Biblical names and phrases, accompanied by a Greek translation which is dependent on the learned lexical tradition.2, The text, transliterated, is as
follows :—. Apia ἴησους ἰωσωτηρια Arima. Jesus: 7763 salva- : tion. ApmA φωσμουθυ Ariél: my light of God. Aland ισχυσθυ Azaél: strength of God. pastes (a word crossed out) . ... . (a word crossed out) 5 ἴωμαν lawmoris 5 Joman: Jad? faith. Ιωβαβ Iw πατὴρ ᾿ Jébab: Jo father. Ηλι Ηλι σαζαχθανι: θεμουθε Eli ἘΠῚ sazachthani : my God, μονεστιμεενκατελιπες my God, to what purpose hast Thou forsaken me?
1 Published by me in the Verdffentlichungen aus dey Heidelberger Papyrus- Sammlung I. No. 5 (p. 86 ff.). 2 Cf. my detailed commentary, bd. Jo and Jao are divine names, derived ultimately from Jahveh.
406 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
Avand χαρισθὺυ Anaél : grace of God. 10 fovda[s] Ἰαωεξο[μο]λογησις Io Juda{s] : Ja6 confession.° [YepayA οἰκτιρμου [Jleraél : of mercy. [{Πεφθαε ἴαωδιανοιξις [JJephthae ; Jad opening. [i]wvaday Ἰαωδομα [J]onathan : Jao gift. [Περοβοαλ Stxacpocavwrepo[s] [JJeroboal: higher giving of judgment. 15 [[]wond ἰαωπροσθεμα 15 [J]éséph : Jaé addition. [Ho]atov επαρσισιαω [Es]aiu : rising of Jad. [...]. λαμ καταπαυσις [- - .].lam: rest. Ἰαχαζ Tawkparos Jachaz : 75 might. [Tax Jawavacraces [JJakin : 116 resurrec- tion. 20 Taw 20 Jao. Karns αγιον Katés: holy. Maava ἐκπαρακλησίεως] Maana : from consola- tion. Μαγαβαηλ διαγαθονθ] ς] Magabaél: how! good God ! 25 Μελεχειηλ βασιλευο[μουθς] 25 Melecheiél: my King God. HA[e] θσμου ἘΠῚ: my God.
In spite of the great age of the Biblical lexical fragments that have come down to us, the scientific lexicography of the Greek New Testament is still young. Its founder was Georg Pasor,? a theologian of Nassau, who printed the first lexicon to the New Testament at Herborn in 1619 (Figure 74), and by means of this book exerted a powerful influence on New Testament studies in all Protestant countries down to the end of the eighteenth century. It appeared in a constant succes-
1 [δὲ is a phonetic spelling for τί, and the translation is confirmed by Jerome, quam bonus Deus. See the author’s commentary, Verdffentlichungen, I. p.93. TR.) :
2 A biographical study of Pasor, who did eminent service in other ways to Biblical philology (he is also the author of the first grammar of the New Testament), is much to be desired. Some details will be found in my little work, ‘‘ Briefe eines Herborner Classicus aus den Jahren 1605 und 1606,” published as a “ programm ”’ in the Denkschrift des Kgl. Preuss. ev.-theo- logischen Seminars zu Herborn fiir die Jahre 1893-1897, Herborn, 1898. Further information in Heinrich Schlosser, Die erste Grammatik des neutesta- mentlichen Griechisch und das erste Septuaginta-Wé6rterbuch, in ‘‘ Neutesta- mentliche Studien fiir G. Heinrici,”’ p. 254 ff. Herborn was in the seventeenth century a centre of Biblical philology: the first dictionary and the first grammar of the N.T. and the first dictionary of the Septuagint (by Zacharias Rosenbach, 1634) were all produced there.
LEXICON GR&ACO. LATIN UM,
ΓΚ NOVUM DOME
NI NOSTRIJE-
SU CHRISTI TESTA. MENT UM,
Ubi omnium vocabulorum Grecorum themata in. dicantur, & utraque tam themata quam derivata Grammaticé refolvuntur.
Cum INDICE COPLIOSISSIMO;
In quo omnes N. T. voces Grecz ordine alphabetico pete ¢enfentur, fingularumd; loci indicantur:
In gratiam facr. litt. & lingua Grace ftudroforum :
Authorey
Georcio Pasore. 1
Herbornz Nafloviorum,1 619.
Fic. 74.—Title-page of the first New Testament Lexicon, by Georg Pasor, Herborn, 1619. From a copy in the Uni- versity Library, Heidelberg. (Actual size.)
RETROSPECT—FUTURE WORK OF RESEARCH 407
sion of reprints, pirated editions, and new editions, and was the parent of two abridgments, one (Manuale) of medium and the other (Syllabus) of small size.
For the amplest enrichment of New Testament word-lore we are indebted to the eighteenth-century compilers of “ Observations,’ the most remarkable of whom, Walch, has been already mentioned above.? It was chiefly their material that supplied the later lexicographers, including those whose books we still use to-day: Wilke and Grimm, Cremer,’ Joseph Henry Thayer, etc. Of these Thayer, working upon the solid foundation of Wilke and Grimm, produced the best and maturest results. But even Thayer is now out of date.
The first main task of the future lexicon will be to place the New Testament vocabulary in living linguistic connexion with the contemporary world. Only in this way can the right place be found for every word, the place to which it belongs in the complete history of the Greek language,. and only in this way can the points of contact and of contrast be estab- lished between the contemporary world and the cult-words used in the gospels and apostolic writings. An author who undertakes a New Testament Lexicon at the present day without sketching in each article the history and statistics of words and meanings, is tearing the world-apostle from his world and the gospel from history, shutting off the New Testament from the light of research, and taking up his own position far behind Thayer and Grimm, even behind Cremer, along with Stellhorn and Schirlitz, 1.6. outside the pale of scientific lexicography altogether.’ The second main task
1 I myself possess altogether 36 different editions of the Lexicon, Manuale, and Syllabus, and should be very grateful for information about any copies of Pasor’s works.
2 Page 12, n. 2.
3 The revised edition of Cremer by Julius Kégel, Gotha, 1911, constitutes a welcome improvement in.many details, though it was not the task of the reviser to interfere with the organic structure of the book.
4 Cf. my review in the Géttingische gelehrte Anzeigen, 1898, p. 920 ff. [Fourth edition, 1901; reprinted, Edinburgh, 1905, 1908, 1914. TR.]
5 E, Preuschen’s Handwérterbuch, Giessen, 1910, was a most regrettable step backward of this kind. Cf. my reviews, Deutsche Literatur-Zeitung 1908, col. 1879 ff.; 1909, 476 ff; 1910, 1181 ff.; and Theologische Rundschau 1911, p. 356 ff. (where further details will be found concerning other recent lexicons by Sophronios Evstratiadis, F. Zorell and others). [The extremely thorough révision of Preuschen by Walter Bauer, Griechisch-Deutsches Worterbuch zu
408 LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST
is to ascertain carefully the phases in the changes of meaning. It will first be necessary, it is true, to bestow some more reflection on the nature and laws of the changes to which religious concepts are liable—this being perhaps the most interesting branch of the whole subject of semasiology.? The third main task is to simplify once more and put warmth again into the popular concepts ‘of Primitive Christianity, which have been artificially complicated and deprived of life by scholastic prejudice and a too anxious process of isola- tion. The new Lexicon must bring out once more afresh the simplicity, inwardness, and force of the utterances of evangelists and apostles. Withal let it serve practical needs in like degree with learning. Perhaps the new Lexicon will meet with that best of all rewards, far exceeding even scholarly recognition, the privilege of exerting an influence in real life. It may be that in a lonely parsonage in the Westerwald,? or in the hired lodgings of the city preacher, it will help on Saturday mornings to unfold the thought in the sacred text to the benefit of the Sabbath congregation, rendering actual as living forces for this present age the treasures of the sacred past.
Inspired by such objects to work for, the New Testament researcher wrestles with one difficulty—the risk that amid the chaos of paper-slips he may lose his own self, while the age he lives in calls for men who can do more than decipher old handwriting, excerpt words on paper-slips, and read proof- sheets. In the midst of his learned labours comes the ques- tion: Is not more accomplished by the men who hoe the vine-
den Schriften des Neuen Testaments, Giessen, 1925-. of which four instal- ments (a — εὐχαριστία) have so far appeared, was reviewed with hearty approval by Deissmann in the Deutsche Literatur-Zeitung, 1925, cols. r105 ff. TR.] An attempt to carry out my programme, without naming me as its author, was made with inadequate equipment by Heinrich Ebeling, Griechisch-deutsches Wovterbuch zum Neuen Testamente, Hannover u. Leipzig, 1913; cf. my review, Deutsche Literatur-Zeitung, 1913, col. 1245 ff.
1 Detached problems of religious semasiology are touched on in my lexical studies on ‘‘ Elements ” (στοιχεῖα) in the Encyclopaedia Biblica II., London, 1gor, col. 1258 ff., and on “' ἱλαστήριος und ἱλαστήριον,᾽᾽ Zeitschrift fir die neu- testamentliche Wissenschaft, 4 (1903) p. 193 ff. Cf.also p. 219, ἢ. “, etc. above.
2 (A rather bleak hilly district of Nassau, north-west of Coblenz, bounded by the Dill (p. 112, n. 3 above) and the Lahn. The author was born at a village on the Lahn, and Herborn, where he and Pasor worked (pp. 237 n., 406 above), ison the Dill. TR.] ,
RETROSPECT—FUTURE WORK OF RESEARCH 409
_yard, who descend the mine, repair the steamer’s screw, help a degenerate back to the right path, exhaust themselves as teachers, leaders, and evangelists among the masses, or plant on fields strewn with the ruins wrought by international hatred the apostolic banner of reconciliation—do they not all do more work for God’s cause than the man who proposes to write a new book, thus adding to the hundredweights which already bind our generation in slavery to the past? .. .
It is always the New Testament itself that calls the man of research back from his wandering thoughts to work on the New Testament again. Daily it bears witness to him of its own veriest nature : the little Book is not one of the paralysing and enslaving forces of the past, but it is full of eternal and present strength to make strong and to make free.
APPENDICES
APPENDIX I JEWISH PRAYERS FOR VENGEANCE FOUND AT RHENEIA
(Reprinted, with slight alterations and with the addition of illustrations, from Philologus 61 [1902] pp. 253-265) ᾿
oe
THE “prayers for vengeance”’ from Rheneia (Rhenea), though published long ago and several times discussed, at least in part, were first made really accessible in rgo1, by Adolf Wilhelm. He not only reproduced them in facsimile, but also for the first time settled with certainty the questions of their connexion, their provenance, and their age. They are inscribed on two gravestones, one of which is now in the Museum at Bucharest, and the other in the National Museum at Athens.2 That the stele at Athens originally came from Rheneia (Magna Delos), the burial-place of the inhabitants of ancient Delos, Wilhelm was able to show from a note which he re-discovered in the first publication 3; and he proved clearly that the stone at Bucharest was of the same origin. Wilhelm also recognised that the inscriptions were Jewish and closely connected with the text of the Septuagint, yet even after his fundamental labours the texts still require to be interpreted, and their high value for the history of the Jewish religion in the Hellenistic world still stands in need of appreciation.
I will first describe the stones and reproduce the texts accord- ing to Wilhelm, checking his statements by my own observations of the originals. The Bucharest stele, being the less damaged
1 Jahreshefte des Osterreichischen Archdologischen Institutes in Wien, 4 (1901) Supplement, cols. 9-18. The whole previous literature is there referred to. In col. 9, n. 1, read LX XVII instead of XXXVII. See now J. Berg- mann, Die Rachegebete von Rheneia, Philologus 70 (1911) pp. 503-510.
2 Even Dittenberger, Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum,? II. (1900) p. 676 f., considered the Bucharest stone as identical with the Athenian, and said it came from Aegina to Athens, and from there to Bucharest. This seems, however, to have put Wilhelm upon the right track.—Newly reprinted in Dittenberger, Sylloge®, No. 1181.
3 Expédition scientifique de Morée . . . Architecture, Sculptures, Inscrip- tions et Vues . . . publiées par Abel Blouet, III., Paris, 1836, plate xiii., cf. p. 7; and especially the exhaustive commentary by Le Bas in the separately paged supplement to this work: Inscriptions copiées dans les fles de la mer Egée, p. 41 ff.
. 413
414 APPENDIX I
of the two, had better be described first. I saw it on 5 April, 1006. It is made of white marble, broken at the top, provided with a tenon underneath, and now still 163 inches high, 12 inches broad, and 24 inches thick. Both sides of the stone have the same inscription, but with a different division into lines and other trifling variations (Figures 75 and 76). Above the written words on both sides there is a pair of uplifted hands, with the palms turned outwards. The text of the side A (Figure 75), which still shows traces of having been originally picked out in red, runs as follows (the words have been separated; accents and punctuation are supplied, and the variant readings of the side B are noted below; no attempt has been made to exhibit the differences in the division into lines) :—
*Euxadodpat καὶ ἀξιῶ τὸν θεὸν τὸν ὕψιστον, τὸν κύριον τῶν πνευμάτων 5 πὴ ’ + Ἃ, μὴ , δ καὶ πάσης σαρκός, ἐπὶ τοὺς δόλωι φονεύ- x cavras ἢ φαρμακεύσαντας τὴν τα- ε 5, λαίπωρον ἄωρον Ἡράκλεαν ἐχχέαν- ἐς. ἮΝ, ἂν τ e ἀδί. τας αὐτῆς τὸ ἀναίτιον αἷμα ἀδί- κως, ἵνα οὕτως γένηται τοῖς φονεύ- σασιν αὐτὴν ἢ φαρμακεύσασιν καὶ τοῖς τέκνοις αὐτῶν, κύριε ὃ πάντα ἐ- 10 φορῶν καὶ οἱ ἄνγελοι θεοῦ, & πᾶσα ψυ- χὴ ἐν τῇ σήμερον ἡμέραι ταπεινοῦται re bs ν 2 δι , με * ἧς ὧν μεθ᾽ ἱκετείας, ἵνα ἐγδικήσης τὸ αἷμα τὸ ἀ- ναίτιον ζητήσεις καὶ τὴν ταχίστην..
3 Sow: B δολω | 6 αναιτιον: B αν. .Jrwv [7 οὑτως : B of.Jras | τὸ ὦ: Wilhelm ᾧ [τὰ τῇ : Wilhelm τῇ | ἡμέραι : Β ἡμέρα | 12 ἐγδι- κήσης : Wilhelm ἐγδικήσῃς | aa: Β af. .1α
The Athenian stele, which I saw on 8 May, 1906, is also of white marble, adorned with a pediment above, and provided with a tenon below; it is much damaged above and on the left side, but still 22 inches high, 13 inches broad, and 32 inches thick. It is inscribed only upon one side, and there is not the slightest doubt, judging from the general structure of the muti- lated upper portion, and from certain remaining traces, that above the inscription there was engraved a pair of hands similar to those on the Bucharest stele} (Figure 77). The text, which may be confidently restored with the help of the Bucharest inscription, runs as follows :—
[Ἐπικ]αλο[ῦμαι καὶ ἀξιῶ τὸν θεὸν τὸν v-] [ψεστο[ν, τὸν κύριον] τῶ[ν πνευμάτων] 1 Wilhelm, col. 12, 60ὺ
᾿Θ.ΠΊΤ5ΤΠ [Ἐ9ΙΘΟΙΟΘΈΙΠΟΙΨ uUeTIIsNYy 91} Jo WorssturIed Ag
“ysoreyong 18 ulnasnyl ay} UI MON ‘(94 “814 ‘gq) Mata yOeq pue (SZ ‘BI ‘W) MeIA 2ποὰ} “oa oor D949 ‘sopeq jo ssamef Ἐ ᾿“ἘΘΙΌΈΙΘΗ 10 ΒΙΘΙΘΡΙΏΙΝ 9112 UO adUeaSuaA, Joy ἸΘΑΈΙΩ & YPM poquiosur ‘erauayy WOT 91935 914 1Έ7Χ
SL ‘oly
‘of “DIT
Mahe ae oe ἴω Seer <=
NHI3IxXW LNHLIUWaAZ13 ZHLHZ NofpLwn VOLWWIWol ZH ZHAI IV NIRV LINO BW (Wit AON T3ZUWL [νὰ AWHNogaWHXHL ΝΞΗΚΧ G1 AkyY ZWUUA0 3OJOVA INVIOLWaANude ᾧ SV AINVUOFIIMANULAY ZIONS 1 ποι IW ANIBVZAI AV Wd Yd H NHL AW NIZ V3, WINOOZJOLIVLHNIIZULIcWN/2Z ΓΙ 1VVWWIY No! LIY NVo.L& HAI AWS WL NY Ax XIN 3VAIWdHNodUWNodU IWS WLNHLS VL NY ABA WdY SH INS es RANODIUVOVZLOLIU S2oNdeZ ΣΉ Ἐν [Ὁ Hf INULIN WARN UNULNOIDAANCLNOLZIAZ No.LNOJONoLUIZVI WAP WAovWaIL .Ξ
NHLZIXWLNHLIW A rare ἘῸ ,» ALHZ NOILIWNVOL W ξξς. AVOLZHAZHAUVIAYNIZ Wey 1g LAXIO FNIVLAON ISUW Le, Wd3WHNodg dale κι ὐὸὶ λάυζσιιυχοπξθιονβ. ΙΝ ΨῈῸ Lyne OPAL NW ΠΟΞΙ 41» NULAW ZION S-LIoLly ANIZ WSA AAW WdYbHNH LAW NIZYW2 Aa No? JoaLIVLHNISIZUL ROW NIS ole OW ΚΓ ΝΟ...
v \ 4
or
iy
τ τον" ἢ
[78]
Yl 1,5] τ δ ay erm ae
ν
Fic. 77.—Marble Stele from Rhencia, inscribed with a Prayer for Vengeance on the Murderers of Marthina, a Jewess of Delos, civca 100 B.c. Now in the National Museum, Athens. By permission of the Austrian Archaeological Institute.
APPENDIX I 415
[κ]αὶ π[ά]σ[ης capxd]s, ἐπὶ τοὺς [δόλωι] φο[νεύσαντας] ἢ φαρμακεύσαν- 5. tals τὴν ταλαίπωρον ἄωρον Map- [θ]ίν[ην ἐχχέαν]τας αὐτῆς τὸ ἀναίτι- - 250 La NA , ον αἷμ[α ἀδίκως, ἵνα οὕτως γένηται ~ ΄ aN x Aa τοῖς φον[εύσα]σιν αὐτὴν ἢ φαρμακεύ- σασιν καὶ [τοῖς τ]έκνοις αὐτῶν, κύριε 10 ὃ πάντα ἐΐ φ]ορῶν καὶ οἱ ἄνγελοι θεοῦ, ὧι πᾶσα ψυχὴ ἐν τῇ σήμερον ἡμέραι τα- a »-ς J 7 3 Ea πεινοῦται μεθ᾽ ἱκετείας, ἵνα ἐγδικήση[ς] τὸ αἷμα τὸ ἀναίτιον καὶ τὴν ταχίστη[ν].
II τῇ : Wilhelm τῇ | 12 ἐγδικήση[ς] : Wilhelm ἐκδικήσῃ[ς].
The question of the age of these texts at Athens and Bucharest shall be postponed until after their interpretation; but we may remark here that according to Wilhelm they both originated not only at the same spot, Rheneia, but also at the same time. There is such close agreement between the two inscriptions throughout that we are entitled to interpret them as two texts of the same original.
It is evident at the first glance that the texts are either of Jewish or of Christian origin, for they are a mosaic from the Septuagint Bible which was common to the Greek Jews and the’ Greek Christians. The echoes of the New Testament observed by Otto Hirschfeld? are in fact, as closer comparison shows, echoes of the Septuagint. The texts contain nothing specifically and exclusively Christian either in formula or in symbol; never- theless decisive judgment must be suspended until the inter- pretation has been attempted.
The pair of hands above the writing is, as Wilhelm 2 has already shown,,a by no means uncommon symbol of the invocation of divine help on pagan stones. It might very easily pass over into the usage of Jews and Christians, since they too lifted up their hands in praying.® In this case, moreover, a prayer is being uttered—a prayer for vengeance on the unknown miscreants by whom two murders had been committed. The rites prescribed by Old Testament law for atonement in the case of murder by an unknown hand facilitated the borrowing of the symbolic pair
1 Sitzungsberichte der philosophisch-historischen Classe der kaiserl. Akademie der Wissenschaften [zu Wien], 77 (1874, Parts IV.-VI.) p. 404 f.
2 Col. 16 f., where will be found the literature on this symbol. See also Rudolf Pagenstecher, Die Auferweckung des Lazarus auf einer rémischen Lampe, Extrait du Bulletin de la Société Archéologique d’Alexandrie, No. 11, Alexandrie, 1908, p. 6 {—The literature might now be extended.
3 Besides the Old Testament passages cf. for example 1 Tim. ii. 8.
416 APPENDIX I
of hands in this case.1 Though this ritual, as shown by our texts, was not observed in the present case, we may nevertheless suppose that here and there a devout person, who knew his Bible, at sight of the uplifted hands. would think not only of hands in prayer, but also of hands free from blood.? :
The prayer begins with the verb émxadotpa:, which occurs in the same way very commonly in the LXX and in early Christian texts,’ and often in the forms of prayer found in magical texts.‘ The combination ἐπικαλοῦμαι. . . τὸν θεὸν τὸν ὕψιστον has good analogies, e.g. in Ecclus. xlvi. 5, ἐπεκαλέσατο τὸν ὕψιστον δυνάστην ; xIvii. 5, ἐπεκαλέσατο γὰρ κύριον τὸν ὕψιστον; 2 Macc. iii. 31, ἐπικαλέσασθαι τὸν ὕψιστον. We also find ἀξιῶ used of prayer, e.g. LXX Jer. vii. 16, xi. 14 (synonymous with προσεύχομαι), Ecclus. li. 14, and frequently in the second book of Maccabees. It is still more significant that both verbs are found together in the same sentence in Jer. xi. 14, though not in the same combination as in our text. On the expression τὸν θεὸν τὸν ὕψιστον Wilhelm ὅ refers to E. Schiirer’s and F. Cumont’s well-known researches on the cult of the ‘‘ Most High God,” but what we have here is not a divine name in use among mono- theistic worshippers who derived it only indirectly from the Bible: it is in fact the direct equivalent of the Biblical why by.
Very remarkable too is the next divine name, τὸν κύριον τῶν πνευμάτων καὶ πάσης σαρκός, Which is obviously (as also in Clem. Rom. 1 Cor. lxiv., δεσπότης τῶν πνευμάτων καὶ κύριος πάσης σαρκός) based upon the formulae, LXX Numbers xvi. 22, XXvii. 16, θεός or κύριος ὁ θεὸς τῶν πνευμάτων Kal πάσης σαρκός. The first part of the formula, ‘Lord οἵ the - spirits,” is especially characteristic. Already in the Septuagint formula the πνεύματα are the ministering spirits, the angels, who in Hebrews i. 14 are expressly so called. In the second part of the Book of Enoch “ Lord of the spirits’ is an almost constant appellation of the Deity. Elsewhere the form is not to my knowledge a common one, apart from the Greek liturgies and
1 Deut. xxi. 6, 7, καὶ πᾶσα ἡ γερουσία τῆς πόλεως ἐκείνης of ἐγγίζοντες τῷ τραυματίᾳ νίψονται τὰς χεῖρας ἐπὶ τὴν κεφαλὴν τῆς δαμάλεως τῆς νενευροκοπημένης ἐν τῇ φάραγγι. καὶ ἀποκριθέντες ἐροῦσιν: af χεῖρες ἡμῶν οὐκ ἐξέχεαν τὸ αἷμα τοῦτο κτλ.
2 The kohanim hands represented on late gravestones of the descendants of Aaron (Immanuel Léw, Der Finger in Littevatuy und Folklore dey Juden, Gedenkbuch zur Erinnerung an David Kaufmann, Breslau, 1900, p. 68) are of course not to be thought of in this connexion.
5 Separate quotations are unnecessary.
‘ Often, for example, in the texts edited by Wessely.
> Col. 16.
® Max Lohr (letter, Kénigsberg, 18 Nov., 1915) thinks ‘‘ Lord of the souls ” a more correct translation.
APPENDIX I 417
magical texts; 1 of earlier date may be mentioned 2 Macc. iii. 24, on good authority, and the above-cited passage from the first Epistle of Clement.
For the construction of ἐπικαλοῦμαι καὶ ἀξιῶ with ἐπί I have no Septuagint example to offer. But the sense of “ against,” rightly advocated also in 2 Cor. i. 23 (μάρτυρα τὸν θεὸν ἐπικαλοῦμαι! ἐπὶ τὴν ἐμὴν ψυχήν) by Heinrici and others,? is quite certain. The phrase δόλωι φονεύσαντας at once reminds us of the old Biblical law, which distinguishes between accidental homicide (Deut. xix. 4, ὃς ἂν πατάξῃ τὸν πλησίον αὐτοῦ οὐκ εἰδώς, cf. verse 5, τύχῃ) and deliberate murder (Exodus xxi. 14, ἐὰν δέ τις ἐπιθῆται τῷ πλησίον ἀποκτεῖναι αὐτὸν δόλῳ). The word δόλῳ is also used in Deuteronomy xxvii. 24 (ὃ τύπτων τὸν πλησίον δόλῳ) in the forensic sense.
The words immediately following are all found in the LXX (φονείω very often; φαρμακεύω, 2 Chron. xxxiii. 6, Psalm lvii. [lviii.] 6, 2 Macc. x. 13; ταλαίπωρος frequently, e.g. of a woman Psalm cxxxvi. [cxxxvii.] 8; ἄωρος frequently, e.g. with nothing to correspond in the Hebrew, Proverbs x. 6, xi. 30, xiii. 2); but none of them is specially characteristic; the same is the case with the common word ἀδίκως.
On the names of the two murdered girls, Heraclea and Marthina, Wilhelm,? who ‘correctly explains the latter as formed from Μάρθα, has already made all necessary remarks. He conjectures that two other gravestones discovered in Rheneia with the inscriptions Ἡράκληα χρηστὴ χαῖρε (Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum II, add. No. 2322 b. 69; Le Bas, fles, 2039) and ‘MapOeivy Εὐτάκτου χρηστὴ χαῖρε (Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum 11, add. ‘No. 2322 b. 78; Le Bas, 7165, 2041) relate to the same two murdered victims, but concerning this I do not venture to pronounce with certainty; it is at any rate possible. But I would at least raise the question whether we are to suppose two separate murders at different times, or whether Heraclea and Marthina met their death at the murderer’s hand simultaneously. Seeing that the two inscriptions agree even in the decisive passage, ll. τὸ ff., I take the latter assumption to be more probable, though the other is of course not altogether excluded.
Very familiar to the reader of the Septuagint is éyxéavras αὐτῆς τὸ ἀναίτιον αἷμα (A 5f., B 6 f.). αἷμα. ἐκχέω is ἃ phrase, not indeed specifically ‘‘ Biblical,’’* but very common in the
1 Cf., for instance, Bibelstudien, Ὁ. 10, Bible Studies, p. 327. Rev. xxii. 6 [R.V.] is exceptional.
3 Cf. p. 304, n. 1 above.
3 Col. 14 ff. 4 The dictionaries quote it from Aeschylus.
ne
418 APPENDIX I
Greek Bible. αἷμα ἀναίτιον occurs five times, and in Deuteronomy xix. τὸ we have the whole phrase, καὶ οὐκ ἐκχυθήσεται αἷμα ἀναίτιον. After the two verbs of asking iva (line 7) is used instead of ὅπως, as often in the Bible and other Hellenistic texts.1 The sense of the petition ἵνα “οὕτως γένηται κτλ., which has a formal ring, is: “May the guilty murderers be overtaken by a violent death like that of their innocent victims ’’; οὕτως is strongly accentuated and seems really to mean “in the same way,’’ a use which we may understand as an abridgment of expressions like LXX Judges i. 7, καθὼς οὖν ἐποίησα, οὕτως ἀνταπέδωκέ μοι 6 θεός. On the subject of retaliation the prayer takes exactly the view of Genesis ix. 6, ὁ ἐκχέων αἷμα ἀνθρώπου ἀντὶ τοῦ αἵματος αὐτοῦ ἐκχυθήσεται, ὅτι ἐν εἰκόνι θεοῦ ἐποίησα τὸν ἄνθρωπον, and Deuteronomy xix. 10-13. The addition of the phrase καὶ τῶν τέκνων αὐτῶν is thoroughly Biblical, as in Exodus xx. 5, ἐγὼ γάρ εἶμι κύριος 6 θεός cov, θεὸς ζηλωτὴς ἀποδιδοὺς ἁμαρτίας πατέρων ἐπὶ τέκνα ἕως τρίτης καὶ τετάρτης γενεᾶς τοῖς μισοῦσί pe, cf. Exodus xxxiv. 7, Numbers xiv. 18.
“The all-seeing Lord” is also a not uncommon formula? in the Bible: LXX Job xxxiv. 23, 6 yap κύριος πάντας (Cod. A τὰ mavta)> ἐφορᾷ ; similarly 2 Macc. xii. 22, xv. 2: cf. Additions to Esther v. 1 (xv. 2), τὸν πάντων ἐπόπτην θεόν; 3 Macc. ii. 21, ὁ πάντων ἐπόπτης θεός; 2 Macc. vii. 35 (cf. iii. 39), rod παντοκράτορος ἐπόπτου θεοῦ. Later echoes of this formula ar® very marked: e.g. Epistle of Aristeas (ed. Wendland) τό, τὸν yap πάντων ἐπόπτην καὶ κτίστην θεόν; Clem. Rom. 1 Cor. lxiv., 6 παντεπόπτης θεός, cf. lv. 6, lix. 3, τὸν ἐπόπτην ἀνθρωπίνων ἔργων; Hadrumetum lead tablet, 36,4 παντεφόπτου; a prayer in the Great Magical Papyrus (Paris) calls the holy πάρεδροι of the Great God (the angels) παντεπόπτας (1. 1369) and ἐφόπτας ὃ (1. 1353); in the same papyrus God is called 6 δύσιν καὶ ἀνατολὴν ἐφορῶν καὶ μεσημβρίαν καὶ ἄρκτον ἀποβλέπων ὃ (1. 2105 f.).
The invocation of the ἀνγελοι θεοῦ (line I0) does not warrant us in assuming a special cult of the angels. The prayer, in fact, keeps well within the bounds of the Biblical creed. An invocation of the angels, and the assurance that the angels carry out God’s will, are both found in LXX Psalm cii. (ciii.) 20, εὐλογεῖτε τὸν κύριον πάντες οἱ ἄγγελοι αὐτοῦ, δυνατοὶ ἰσχύϊ ποιοῦντες τὸν λόγον αὐτοῦ.
1 E.g. Epistle of Aristeas (ed. Wendland) 17, 193, 226, ἐπικαλεῖσθαι ἵνα.
3 Cf. Bibelstudien, Ὁ. 47; Bible Studies; p. 293; and p. 347, n. 2 above. Wilh. Michaelis refers to the Homeric és πάντ᾽ ἐφορᾷ (of Helios).
3 Codex A, therefore, as Wilhelm pointed out (col. 15 f.), has the same reading as our inscriptions imply, but with the article added. The article, however, is wanting in 2 Macc. xii. 22, xv. 2.
4 Bibelstudien, pp. 30, 47; Bible Studies, pp. 276, 293.
5 Wessely, pp. 79, 78. 6 Wessely, p. 99 f.
APPENDIX I 419
The corresponding ideas on this subject in later Jewish belief have already been pointed out by Wilhelm.!
The most important and, for the general criticism of the texts, decisive passage is undoubtedly line τὸ ff.: ὧι πᾶσα ψυχὴ ἐν τῆ σήμερον ἡμέραι ταπεινοῦται μεθ᾽ ixerefas. The phrases πᾶσα ψυχή, ἐν τῇ σήμερον ἡμέρᾳ, ταπεινόω; ἱκετεία, are all more or less common in the Greek Old Testament. The whole sentence has the sound of LXX Leviticus xxiii. 29, πᾶσα ψυχή, ἥτις μὴ ταπεινωθήσεται ἐν αὐτῇ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ταύτῃ, Which passage Wilhelm? probably had in mind. But we should explain little by the bare reference to this formal dependence on the Greek Bible. The question is: What is to be understood by ‘‘ this same day, on which every soul is humbled with supplication’’? It must refer to some day of celebration—as remarked by Dittenberger,? though he gives no further explanation. From the text itself it seems only to follow that a general day of prayer is meant. But we find more than this. The expression ψυχὴν ταπεινοῦν is obviously used, not in the general ethical sense of “‘ humbling one’s self’ (as in LKX Isaiah ii. 17; Psalm xlili. [xliv.] 26; Ecclus. 11. 17, vii. 17; cf. the use of ταπεινοῦν in the Gospels and other early Christian texts), but,.as the context surely shows, in the technical sense of ‘mortifying the flesh’ = “ fasting.’’ The Greek expression is an exact imitation of the Hebrew wb) my and is used thus in LXX Leviticus xvi. 29, 31; xxiii. 27, 29, 32; Isaiah lviii. 3, 5 (in verse 10 it means ‘‘ to hunger,” probably by an extension of this sense); Judith iv. g (cf. verse 13). In Psalm xxxiv. [xxxv.] 13 it is expressly explained: καὶ ἐταπείνουν ἐν νηστείᾳ τὴν ψυχήν pov. Thus our text speaks not only of a day of prayer, but of a day of prayer and fasting. Are we then to imagine a day of prayer and fasting specially appointed on account of the murder of the two girls? The authorities frequently mention 4 public days of fasting on the occasion of some great public danger or heavy visitation; especially instructive, for instance, is the statement in the Mishna (Taanith III. 6) that the elders of Jerusalem once proclaimed a fast because the wolves had devoured two little children. We might assume from the nature of things that these days of fasting were also days of prayer, but the fact is expressly confirmed by the account in Judith iv. 9-13.
On the other hand, against the assumption that the fellow- believers of the two murdered maidens in Delos observed an
1 Col. 18. - 2 Col. 16.
3 Op. cit., p. 677, “ Quinam potissimum dies festus intelligendus sit, . . . diiudicandum relinquo.”
4 The best collection of the evidence is still that in Winer’s old Bibl. Real-
worterbuch 1.8 (1847) p. 364 f.
420 APPENDIX I
extraordinary day of prayer and fasting whilst the awful shock of the dark deed was still upon them,! we must set the words πᾶσα ψυχή, Which point rather to a general day of prayer and fasting. The word πᾶσα must of course not be pressed; it does not mean every person whatever, but every one that raises his hands in prayer to the ‘‘ Most High God, the Lord of the spirits and of all flesh,” in other words, every Jew.
Thus we have already taken sides on the question whether the text is Christian or Jewish. The fast day on which all fast and pray is evidently the jm hakkippurim, the great Day of Atonement, to which the above-mentioned provisions of the law concerning ψυχὴν ταπεινοῦν relate. All the other expressions in the texts might be either Jewish or Christian; the really characteristic sentence, however, fairly provokes reference to the Jewish Day of Atonement, whilst there is scarcely an early Christian festival to which it could be made to apply without forcing the meaning. Wilhelm’s conjecture that the texts are Jewish is admirably confirmed by this explanation.
On this point a further remark must be made. That a prayer for vengeance should be offered on the Day of Atonement is not remarkable, when we find that later prayers for use on that day also ask for vengeance for blood that has been shed.? I cannot refrain from remarking that, while prayers such as these are certainly below the level of the prayer in Luke xxiii. 34, the prayer in Revelation vi. 10 is not a whit above them.
The last two lines also are in agreement with the whole tenor of the rest. I suppose that the copy given to the stone-cutter ran: ἵνα ἐγδικήσης τὸ αἷμα τὸ ἀναίτιον καὶ ζητήσης τὴν ταχίστην, and can see no necessity for Dittenberger’s transposition (adopted by Wilhelm 3) ἵνα ζητήσῃς τὸ ἀναίτιον αἷμα καὶ ἐγδικήσῃς τὴν ταχίστην. The two verbs are synonymous, so that in LXX Joel iii. [iv.] 21, for instance, Cod. A writes ἐκδικήσω τὸ αἷμα instead of ἐκζητήσω τὸ αἷμα. αἷμα ἐκδικεῖν occurs elsewhere in LXX Deuteronomy xxxii. 43, 2 Kings ix. 7; αἷμα ζητεῖν is used
1M. Meinertz, of Braunsberg, writing from Berlin, 5 September, 1908, advocates this assumption, connects the fva-clause with ἱκετείας, and takes πᾶσα ψυχή to mean the whole Jewish community of Delos.
2 A specialist would have more quotations to offer than I can command. But I think a single quotation at second hand sufficient in this case. J. A. Eisenmenger, Entdecktes Judenthum, 1700, II. Ὁ. τοσ, quotes from the Dicke Thephilla, Frankfurt a. M., 1688, fol. 50, col. 2, a prayer for the Day of Atone- ment: ‘‘ Make me also worthy to behold the coming of Thine Anointed, and avenge Thy people, the House of Israel; and avenge the blood of Thy servants that has been shed, swiftly and in our days.”
3 Col. 13. ᾿
APPENDIX I 421
like αἷμα ἐκζητεῖν, which.is very common in the LXX (cf. also Luke xi. 50).
The ending τὴν ταχίστην, a formula found also in 1 Macc. xi. 22, reminds one of the very common ἤδη ἤδη ταχὺ ταχύ of many prayers of conjuration.! But similar formulae can be cited from prayers in official use among the Jews: the twelfth Berakah of the Shemoneh Esreh, to mention but one example,* runs: “‘. . . May all they that do evil perish quickly, and may they all right soon be rooted out; and do Thou cripple and break in pieces and overthrow and bend the haughty, soon, with speed, in our days.” ® We are also reminded of the early Christian (and LXX 4) formula ἐν τάχει, Luke xviii. 8, Romans xvi. 20, Revelation i. 1, xxii. 6, and ταχύ (frequent in Revelation). The observation of L. Blau,> that in Jewish texts of conjuration (as . might be expected) echoes of the prayer-book are not wanting, receives new confirmation from this little touch.
The interpreter has yet another question to answer. Why is the text repeated in duplicate on the Bucharest stone? We must conjecture that the prayer was to be made more insistent by this means. Repetition makes an incantation “ more powerful,’ ὁ so we may suppose the same to hold good here.
The question as to the age of our text was answered by Le Bas, the first editor, on the supposition that he was dealing with a Christian epitaph. From its similarity to certain cursing formulae in Christian epitaphs, or at the end of Christian manu- scripts, or in the ritual of the Church, he felt obliged to conclude, although the shape of the letters did not seem to suit the assump- tion, that the inscription belonged to the r1th or 12th century A.D.! A reflecting reader of his investigations might easily, without recourse to other works, have observed two things. The characteristic Christian phrases in the late cursing formulae quoted by Le Bas were wanting in the text of the inscription, and the actual resemblances between the inscription and the
1 Cf., for example, Bibelstudien, p. 43; Bible Studies, p. 289.
2 The later prayer-books furnish many instances; cf. ‘“ swiftly and in our days ’’ in the prayer already quoted from the Dicke Thephilla.
3 The translation by Schirer, Gesch. des 74. Volkes im Zeitalter Jesu Christi, 11.3 Ὁ. 461 has been followed. [1,655 literally in the Eng. trs. of Schirer, Div. II., vol. 2, p. 86.]
4 As-pointed out to me by Weissbrodt (letter, Braunsberg, 25 April, 1910).
5 Das altjtidische Zauberwesen, p. 110.
8 Ibid., p. 86 with reference to Jewish conjurations. Eduard Norden (post- card, Gross-Lichterfelde W., 4 September, 1908) confirms this conjecture, and refers to his commentary on Vergil, Aeneid VI. 45 (p. 136).
. 422 APPENDIX I
late formulae occurred only in the gaps of the text which Le Bas had filled up conjecturally.1 It was therefore quite right of Wilhelm not to beg the question by assuming the Christian origin of the text, but to start from the form of the letters and the outward appearance of the stone. He arrived at.the result that the writing was that of the second century B.c.! This great difference in the opinions of two epigraphists might well make us diffident, were it not that between 1836 and 1901 there lies more than half a century of epigraphical research, which brought an enormous increase of data and steady progress in method. The history of the exposition of our texts is the history of that progress. In 1874 Otto Hirschfeld? declared that “to judge from the writing” the Bucharest text (the chronology of which does not differ from that of the Athenian) could scarcely be later than the second century a.p. In 1900 W. Dittenberger ὃ from the style of the writing placed it in the first century A.D. Wilhelm has now set the date of the Athenian text still further back, and three specialists, after inspecting the stone, have corroborated his opinion. At his request, Th. Homolle, P. Wolters, and Baron F. Hiller von Gaertringen examined the writing, without regard to the subject-matter, and assigned it to the second century B.c., “ without of course excluding the possibility that it was written in the early decades of the following century, but in any case before the pillage in the year 88 B.c. and the fall of Delos.” 4
In this judgment we may have full confidence. The proba- bility of a Christian origin has been already disproved by inter- pretative criticism. The simplicity .of the texts bespeaks a high ‘antiquity; the intricate confusion of the later incantations is altogether wanting in these formulae. The contents afford not the smallest inducement to dispute the date established by the specialists in epigraphy. The prayers are Jewish inscriptions of the end of the second or beginning of the first century B.c.
What is the importance of this fact? Jewish inscriptions of the pre-Christian period are very rare, and merely on that account every increase of material is of interest. But even in details the texts yield a respectable harvest. They afford con- firmatory proofs of the existence of a Jewish community at
1 Le Bas restores lines 2 and 3 thus: [af] ἀραὶ [τῶν ἁγίων πατέρων]; and line 7, afu[a: καὶ ἀνάθεμ]α οὕτως γένηται. Out of all Le Bas’ material there only remains the combination “΄ God and the angels ’’ common to the inscrip- tion and a 1oth-century formula of excommunication. ' But it is self-evident that this combination is extremely ancient.
2 ΟΡ. cit. p. 4041. 3 Op. cit. p. 677.
4 Wilhelm, col. 11.
APPENDIX I 423
Delos in the time of the successors of Alexander!; they more- over render it probable that the Jews of Delos also buried their dead at’ Rheneia. That must have been in compulsory con- formity with the customs of the place. But the name Heraclea, the ending of the name Marthina, the shape of the gravestones, the symbol of the two hands on the stones, and notably the whole style of the prayer *—these are all adaptations to the Hellenic surroundings. Hellenism is already at work on the great task of peacefully secularising the Jewish faith, and this at a time when in the old home of that faith men were still living who had witnessed the great days when the Maccabean martyrs poured out their blood for the law of their fathers.
This Hellenisation from outside was assisted from another direction by the Hellenisation of the Bible which originated with the cosmopolitan Jews of Alexandria. The Septuagint was already in use among the Jews of the Diaspora when ‘the inscrip- tions at Rheneia were composed. This is a very important fact. Our inscriptions add to the literary evidence? of the existence and use of the Septuagint in early times an original document that is only a few decades later than the celebrated testimony of the prologue to Ecclesiasticus. In this respect they are more valuable than the tablet of Hadrumetum.
They show further that the great Day of Atonement was actually celebrated by the Jews of Delos in the period about 100 B.c. We are not particularly well informed about worship in the Diaspora, and we therefore welcome the evidence that our stones give as to the celebration of the Feast of Feasts one hundred and fifty years before the time when the apostle Paul sailed in an Alexandrian ship on Cretan waters, shortly after the Fast 4 (i.e. the Day of Atonement).
Finally the inscriptions from Rheneia afford us a glimpse of the inner life of the Jewish community at Delos. Two girls, Heraclea and Marthina, have been murdered; the murderers, to whose guile or magic the poor things have fallen victims, are unknown. The blood of the innocent cries aloud to Heaven, for it is written, ‘‘ Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall
1 Other evidence in Schiirer 111.8 p. 27.—Highly important is the discovery of the synagogue of Delos which has since been made by the French archaeolo- gists; cf. A. Plassart, La synagogue juive de Délos, in the ‘“‘ Mélanges Hol- leaux,” Paris, 1913, and Juster I. p. 497 ff.
2 The old rite (Deuteronomy xxi.) referred to above (p. 416, n. 1) could not be carried out amid foreign surroundings. Ancient analogies can easily be found from the references in Wilhelm, col. 16 f. .
3 Schirer 111.8 p. 310 f. (Eng. trs., Div. 11., vol. 3, pp. 160 ff.]
4 Acts xxvii. Q.
424 APPENDIX I
his blood be shed.” So vengeance is left to Him who visits the sins of the fathers upon the children. On the most solemn festival of the year, when all Israel afflict themselves and the prayers of the scattered children of Abraham rise everywhere on the four winds of heaven to the throne of the Eternal, whilst at Jerusalem the high priest enters the “ Holy of Holies ’—the mourners bring their grim petition before God; in fervent prayer on the Day of Atonement they consign the murderers to the vengeance of the Omniscient and His angels :—
“T call upon and pray the Most High God, the Lord of the spirits and of all flesh, against those who with guile murdered or
isoned the wretched, untimely lost Heraclea, shedding her innocent blood wickedly : that it may be: so with them that murdered or poisoned her, and with their children; O Lord that seeth all things, and ye angels of God, Thou before whom every soul is afflicted this same day with ‘supplication : that Thou mayst avenge the innocent blood and require it again right speedily !”
And the same prayer is recited for Marthina, and immortalised in marble above the graves of the murdered maidens yonder in the island of the dead; daily shall the words of the prayer, dumb lines on the marble to the passer-by, but loud groans to the living God, tell of the unexpiated blood of Heraclea and Marthina; and even the Greek, to whom the formulae of the prayer seem strange, observes the uplifted hands, and perceives with a shudder the meaning of the writing on the Jewish graves.
APPENDIX II
ON THE TEXT OF THE SECOND LOGIA FRAGMENT FROM OXYRHYNCHUS
(First published in the Supplement to the Aligemeine Zeitung [Munich] No. 162, 18 July, 1904, and now adapted.)
THE fourth volume of the Oxyrhynchus Papyri ! offers, in addition to other theological texts, a new fragment with sayings of Jesus, which is assigned to the third century.
The most important task in connexion with the’ venerable document is the reconstruction of the text. Although more easy to read for a non-expert than the first fragment with sayings of Jesus from Oxyrhynchus, published in 1897, the new papyrus presents harder riddles, because the number of missing letters, and in consequence the number of possible restorations, is far greater. Altogether there are five or perhaps six longer or shorter sayings, which are said to be by Jesus. It is a fortunate circum- stance that one of them was already known as an Agraphon (from the Gospel according to the Hebrews as quoted by Clement of Alexandria), Thus the approximate number of letters to be restored was ascertained, and this part ? of the fragment could be completed with tolerable certainty :—
I
5 [λέγει Ἰης μὴ πιυσάσθω ὃ ζητῶν . . . .«..... ἕως ἂν] εὕρῃ καὶ ὅταν εὕρῃ [θαμβηθήσεται καὶ θαμ-} βηθεὶς βασιλεύσει κα[ὶ βασιλεύσας avarra-] ἥσεται.
1 The Oxyrhynchus Papyri, Part IV., edited with translations and notes by Bernard P. Grenfell and Arthur 5. Hunt, London, 1904, No. 654, p. 1 ff.— For further researches on the text cf. the work of H. G. Evelyn White mentioned at p. 44, π. 1 above; also J. H. A. [not J. A. H.] Michelsen in Teyler’s Theologische Tijdschrift 7, p. 214 ff.; W.Schubart, Einfithrung indie Papyrus- hunde, p. 176f., and Zeitschrift fir die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft 20 (1921) p. 215 ff.; and M. J. Lagrange, Revue Biblique 30 (1921) p. 233 ff., and 31 (1922) p. 427 ff.; [M. R. James, The Apocryphal New Testament, Oxford, 1924, pp. 25-28. ΤᾺ] No attempt is here made to discuss their results : the appendix is reprinted as it stood. ᾿Ξ I pass over the first lines ;. they contain a “ Saying of Jesus ” that is by no means so interesting as the rest.
-
425
426 APPENDIX II
Jesus saith: Let him that seeketh .. . not cease .. . until he findeth, and when he findeth he shall be amazed, and having been amazed he shall reign, and having reigned he shall rest.
Far less certain than this ? is the restoration of the two following “Sayings.” The editors read and conjecture as follows :
τ ΝΙΝ ΄, λέγει [ys ww ee tives] 10 of ἕλκοντες ἡμᾶς [εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν εἰ] € ΄ 2 3 a ἃ Ld ἡ βασιλεία ἐν οὐρα[νῷ ἐστίν ;. .. ee ee ] a a a μὲ τὰ πετεινὰ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ καὶ τῶν θηρίων ὅ-] : Me ΝΑῚ lal > x a ἃ ἃ a iol ‘ τι ὑπὸ τὴν γῆν ἐστ[ὶν ἢ ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς καὶ] οἱ ἰχθύες τῆς θαλάϊσσης οὗτοι οἱ éA\Kov- | I5 τες ὑμᾶς, καὶ ἡ βασ[ιλεία τῶν οὐρανῶν] ἀκ ΞΕ eon 2 ν ,4¢ A ε x ἐντὸς ὑμῶν [ἐ]στὶ [καὶ ὅστις ἂν ἑαυτὸν] γνῶ ταύτην εὑρήσει... ee ee ] ε Ἂ, Ἑ 8 εἰ ἰδ , ot ee ἑαυτοὺς γνώσεσθε 3 [καὶ εἰδήσετε ὅτι υἱοί] ἐστε ὑμεῖς τοῦ πατρὸς τοῦ τ΄. . - ee ee ee ] 20 γνώσ«εσ!θε ἑαυτοὺς ἐν [.. ......ὐὐ νων ] καὶ ὑμεῖς ἐστὲ nro [. . .]
Jesus saith : ... who are they that draw us into the Kingdom if the Kingdom isin Heaven? . . . the fowls of the air, and of beasts whatsoever is under the earth or upon the earth, and the fishes of the sea, these are they that draw you, and the Kingdom of Heaven is within you, and whosoever knoweth himself shall find it... . Know yourselves, and ye shall perceive that ye are sons of the Father of . . . Know yourselves ... andyeare...
The whole restoration is ultimately dependent on the inter- pretation given to the word ἕλκοντες, which the editors understand in a good sense, and at the same time an ethical sense, on the analogy of ἑλκύω in John vi. 44 and xii. 32. I must confess that this meaning was clear to me neither at first reading nor after considerable reflection, and that in the whole passage as restored by the editors I find much that to me scems unintelligible, extra- ordinary in itself and doubtful linguistically. My first impression of the word ἕλκοντες was that its meaning is the same as in James ii. 6, etc., “ to drag,” “‘ to hale.” I thus agree as regards
1 [In the English renderings of these “ Sayings “’ it has not been considered necessary to adhere to the translations given by Grenfell and Hunt. An attempt has been made, as in dealing with the documents in the text of the
book, to harmonise the language of the translations with that of the English Bible as far as possible. Tr.] ᾿ 3 The meaning of the ‘‘ Saying’ may be disputed; cf. A. Harnack’s new discussion in the Sitzungsberichte der Berliner Akademie, 1904, p. 175 ff. 3 Papyrus: γνωσεσθαι. 4 Papyrus: γνωσθε.
APPENDIX II 427
the sense rather with Bartlet, who proposed another restoration to the editors, taking ἕλκω in the sense of ‘to persecute.” 1 But I cannot bring myself to adopt Bartlet’s restoration. With the same reservation that I expressed in restoring the supposed Gospel-Fragment from Cairo? (a reservation that will seem perfectly natural to everyone conversant with the subject), I venture to submit the following attempted restoration, which is to be judged, of course, not by the details (which are capable of manifold and obvious variations), but by the idea underlying it. The parallels of words and subjects, which furnish at least hypo- thetical justification for my attempt, are noted below.
λέγει Ilys’ πῶς λέγουσιν 3] IO οἱ ἕλκοντες ἡμᾶς 3 [εἰς τὰ κριτήρια, ὅτι] ἡ βασιλεία ἐν οὐρα[νῷ ἐστίν ; μήτι δύνα(ν)ται 5] τὰ πετεινὰ τοῦ οὐρ[ανοῦ ἐπιγινώσκειν, fe ἐὶς ν a 7 A ἃς ,» aA > ~ τί ὑπὸ τὴν γῆν ἐστ[ίν ; καὶ τί ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ] οἱ ἰχθύες τῆς θαλάσσης Ἴ; οὕτως οἱ 8 ἕλκον- 7 I5 τες ὑμᾶς. καὶ ἡ βασιλεία ὅμως μέντοι 3] > * ε cat a 4 La 2k ἊΨ δὲς. Ἂν «ε an ἐντὸς ὑμῶν [ἐ]στί[ν. καὶ ὃς ἐὰν τὰ ἐντὸς ὑμῶν]
a o ε “ 10 γνῷ, ταύτην εὑρήσει 10... ee νος J ἑαυτοὺς γνώσεσθε 13 [ἐνώπιον τοῦ θεοῦ,᾽5 καὶ υἱοί]
13] 14)
ἐστε ὑμεῖς τοῦ πατρὸς τοῦ τ[ελείου ἐ εν οὐρᾳνῷ.
20 γνώσ«εσ!θε ἑαυτοὺς ἐνώπιον τῶν ἀνθρώπων, καὶ ὑμεῖς ἐστέ, ἡ πτο[εῖσθε.15] 1 George Wilkins (letter, Dublin, 24 October, 1908) takes the word in the sense of “ carping at ’’ (Latin vellicave) and refers to Pindar, Nem. 7, 152. 2 See Appendix No. III. p. 434 below. 5. Mark xii. 35; Luke xx. 41. § μας might stand for ὑμας, as Grenfell and Hunt observed. 5 James ii. 6; συνέδρια of course would suit just as well, Matt. x. 17, Mark xiii. 9. § Luke vi. 39. ? For the chiasmus in the arrangement of the clauses cf. Ed. Kénig, Stilistck, Rhetovik, Poetik in Bezug auf die biblische Literatur, Leipzig, 1900, p. 146 f. 8 Luke xii. 21, etc. 9. John xii. 42; for the thought Luke x. 11, xvii. 21. 10 For the thought cf. Matt. x. 40. 11 The future is hortative; the following καί introduces the consequence :
“ Know yourselves ... ,andyeare . . a
12 Luke xvi. 15. 13 Matt. v. 48. 14 Luke xvi. 15.
15 7.0. “γα are there where ye must be terrified ’’ (Luke xxi. 9, xxiv. 37). For the thought cf. Luke xvi. 15; ‘‘ Know yourselves before men” is the
preliminary step to “justify yourselves before men.” Closely akin to this, only from a different point of view, is τ John iii. 1: ἴδετε ποταπὴν ἀγάπην δέδωκεν ἡμῖν é πατήρ, ἵνα τέκνα θεοῦ κληθῶμεν καί ἐσμεν. διὰ τοῦτο 6 κόσμος [in meaning identical with of ἄνθρωποι] οὐ γινώσκει ἡμᾶς. .—The enigmatical ἥπτο in line 21 might in itself be restored as ἡ πτοή (‘' the terror,” 1 Macc. iii. 25, 3 Macc. vi. 17 Cod. A) or ἡ πτόησις ( the terror,’’ LXX, τ Peter iii. 6). But “ ye are the terror τ᾿ would be too extraordinary.
428 APPENDIX II
Jesus saith: How say they that draw us before the judgment seats that the Kingdom is in Heaven? Can the fowls of the air know what is under the earth? and the fishes of the sea what is in the heaven? So are they that draw you. And the Kingdom nevertheless is within you. And whosoever knoweth your inward parts shall find it. . . . Know yourselves in the sight of God, and ye are sons of your Father which is perfect in Heaven. Know yourselves in the sight of men, and ye are there where ye are terrified.
I regard the whole as being spoken to the apostles in the same tone as the well-known words at the sending forth. As a mocking objection to the message of the apostles, ‘‘ The Kingdom is at hand,” a sentence like ‘“‘ The Kingdom is in Heaven’’ is well conceivable in the mouth of opponents. The comparison with the birds and fishes illustrates the opponents’ want of apprehension.
The next ‘‘ Saying’ may be restored more simply and, in my opinion, with much greater certainty as regards the underlying principle. The editors print it thus :—
III
[ λέγει Ins] οὐκ ἀποκνήσει ἄνθρωπος... . ... .. ] ρων ἐπερωτῆσαι mal... ee ] ρὼν περὶ τοῦ τόπου THs. we ] 25 σετε ὅτι πολλοὶ ἔσονται π[ρῶτοι ἔσχατοι καὶ] οἱ ἔσχατοι πρῶτοι καὶ [. . . ee ee J ow.
In line 24 they incline to propose τῆϊς βασιλείας], and in lines 26 £. [ζωὴν αἰώνιον ἕξου]σιν.
_ Jesus saith: Aman... willnot delay to ask . . . concerning his place in the Kingdom. . . . [Know ye] that many that are first shall be last, and the last first, and shall have eternal life.
Here too I feel bound to take quite another course; Luke xiv. 7 ff. gives me the hint :—
[ λέγει Tas οὐκ ἀποκνήσει ἄνθρωπος κληθεὶς σώφ-] ρων ἐπερωτῆσαι πάϊΪντως ἕνα τῶν κλητό- pov? περὶ τοῦ τόπου τῆϊς δοχῆς ποῦ ἀνακλιθή-
1 Papyrus : ἐπερωτησε.
2 Cf. δειπνοκλήτωρ, Matt. xx. 28 Cod. D. For the plural number of slaves who carry the invitations cf. Matt. xxii. 3 ff. The guest on entering asks one of the house-slaves standing ready to wait (e.g., the one known to him already as the bringer of the invitation) where he is to sit, or he inquires directly he receives the invitation.
APPENDIX II . 429
25 cera
οἱ ἔσχατοι πρῶτοι καὶ [δόξαν 3 εὑρήσονυ-} σιν.
ὅτι πολλοὶ ἔσονται π[ρῶτοι ἔσχατοι καὶ]
Jesus saith: A man that was bidden will not delay, if he is prudent, by all means to ask one of them that did the bidding, concerning his place at the feast, where he shall sit. For many that are first shall be last, and the last first, and shall find worship.
Thus we have a variation of the words concerning those who chose out the chief rooms, and in this (new) context the saying about the first and the last! The restoration that I have made ‘in line 26f., [εὑρήσου]σιν, is of course quite uncertain. I may refer, however, to an observation that, so far as I know, has not yet been made. In the Logia of 1897 there was frequent mention of “ finding,” as now also in the two new “‘ Sayings ’’ I. and II. The same applies to ‘‘ seeing " (and its synonyms). Is it possible that we have here a hint of the method on which these collections of apophthegms were arranged ?
“ Saying ’”’ No. IV. is an interesting variant and enlargement of Matthew x. 26 and its parallels. Here too the last word has yet to be spoken concerning the text, but for the present I have no independent proposals to make. ‘‘ Saying” No. V. is so greatly mutilated that the combined work of many students is necessary, before attempts at reconstruction can be made.
1 -gere in the papyrus may easily be meant for -cerat; cf. emepwryce instead of ἐπερωτησαι above. 2 Luke xiv. ro.
APPENDIX ΠῚ THE SUPPOSED FRAGMENT OF A GOSPEL AT CAIRO
(Reprinted with slight alterations from the Archiv fiiy Religionswissenschaft,- 7, PP. 387-392.)
In the Catalogue général des antiquités égyptiennes du Musée du Caire, Vol. X. (Nos. 10001~10869 Greek Papyri), Oxford, 1903, B. P. Grenfell and A. 5. Hunt publish a papyrus fragment (No. 10735) with the following text written in a small uncial hand of the 6th or 7th century. I print it with the editors’ restorations.
RECTO VERSO ἄγγελος KU ἐλαλησεν Tolonp | we ee παραλαβε Μαριαν τὴν γίνναικα 1. ερμηνευετω σοι οἷ σου και ] φησι τη παρθενω ἴδου
φευγε εἰς Αἰγυπτον κοι o συγ͵γενης σου Ks αὐτὴ συν
lise wrt Jintia cree [-.7...[ 5. ]s ἐστι μὴν αὐτὴ τὴ xo [ 57.Bol..-]-p--[ ]rw extw ο ἐστιν [
παν δωρον xs εανΐ Ἰωαννην συνελαβε
φίλους αὐτου καθ [ ἷ Ἴφειν τὸν apyigtpa
βασιλεως d [ Ἵν otkernv προβαδι
εἰφ ον} Io ] παρουσιας
TO των θὰ 7τα
The editors see in the sheet the remains of a book ‘‘ containing apparently an uncanonical gospel. The verso (10 incomplete lines) is concerned with the Annunciation (?); the recto (9 incom- plete lines) with the flight to Egypt.”
Regarding the opinion here expressed, that the fragment before us is part of an uncanonical gospel, certain doubts suggest themselves.
In the first place the order in which the two pages stand is- against it. If the fragment is a leaf from a book containing a gospel, it was no doubt one of the first leaves in the book, as we may conclude from the contents (flight to Egypt and annuncia- tion of the birth of the Baptist to Mary); and in that case it
would belong to that half of the first quire in which verso follows —
430
APPENDIX III 431
τϑοῖο.; We should thus have a gospel in which the annunciation of the birth of [Jesus and] the Baptist to Mary followed after the flight into Egypt, and that is very improbable.
Then the contents of the text, so far as they can be made out, are not reconcilable with the assumption of Grenfell and Hunt. If the fragment is part of a gospel, then the recto-text requires us, after the words of the angel to Joseph, “ Flee into Egypt,” to reconstruct lines in which there is mention of a “ gift,” ‘his friends,” and a “ king.” Though we might imagine Herod as the king, the other two legible fragments of lines hardly suit the context in a narrative of the flight into Egypt. The verso-text, on the other hand, requires, after the words of the angel Gabriel announcing the birth of the Baptist to Mary, a sentence or sen- tences with the words archistra[tegus],2 ‘‘ servant,” “ arrival.” These also are elements which one would hardly expect to find in “this place in a gospel.
The doubts vanish if we assume that the fragment contains some kind of reflections on the flight into Egypt and the words of Gabriel, reflections either of an exegetical or edifying nature, and that instead of coming from a gospel it comes from a com- mentary or a book of sermons.
On this supposition the verso-text may really be in great part recovered. The problem of finding a text logically coherent with the words of the angel and containing the above-named elements became easier when προβαδὶ was recognised as the remains of some part of the verb προβαδίζω; after words referring to the conception of the Baptist it was quite appropriate to find a sentence describing John as the “ servant ”’ who “ goeth before’ the ‘‘ coming ”’ of the Master. Then when I had found that in Byzantine writers the archangels Michael and Gabriel are sometimes called by the name of ἀρχιστράτηγος,,Ὡ which presumably goes back to LXX Joshua v. 14, the last doubtful word in this curious passage was brought into connexion with the rest, and it was possible to attempt restoration, provided that the approximate length of the lines was ascertainable.
The length of the lines, however, followed with some probability from lines 1 and 2 recto, which I thus completed 4 from Matthew ii. 13.:--
1 [In the second half of a quire recto follows verso. See the explanation of these terms, p. 29 above. TR.]
3 This restoration of line 8 is perfectly obvious.
3 Ἐς A. Sophocles, Greek Lexicon of the Roman and Byzantine Periods, New York and Leipzig, 1888, p. 259.
41 had to remember that the abbreviation xs might be written instead of καὶ (as in 1. 6 recto and 1. 4 verso). Iwon¢ I take as a vocative.
432 APPENDIX III
ayyeAos KU ἐλαλησεν᾽ Tolond εγερθεις] παραλαβε Μαριαν την γίυναικα σου xs] φευγε εἰς Αἰγυπτον, etc.
The lines 4 and 5 verso also gave the length with reasonable probability, after I had thus restored them from Luke i. 36 :—
[Ελισαβετ ἡ συγ]γενης cov Ks αὐτὴ ov [εἰληφε xs εκτοὶς ἐστι μὴν αντὴ τὴ κᾳ[λου] [μενη στειρα, etc. There are thus about 30 letters to the line. The considerations that led to the further experiment of restoring lines 6, 7, and 8 will appear from the little commentary below. I first give the text as restored and punctuated :—
1. ερμηνενετω σοι. οἶδε ἀρχιστρατηγος] φησι τὴ παρθενω" ἴδου Ελισαβετ ἡ συγ͵γενης σον Ks αντη συν-
5. εἰληφε xs exto]s ἐστι μὴν αντὴη τὴ Ka[Aov- μένη στειρα. εν ] τω εκτω, o ἐστιν [Θωθ, μη- νι ἢ βῆΡ apa Ἰω]αννὴν συνελαβε. ede δὲ προκηρυσΊσειν τον ἀρχιστρα- τήγον ἰωαννὴν το]ν οἰκετὴν προβαδι-
10 ζοντα της του KU αντου] παρουσιας. 7τᾳ
A few remarks may be permitted on the above.
Line 3. The restoration is of course not certain; there are other obvious possibilities.
Line 4. συγγενὴς in Luke i. 36 has the support of not a few authorities; most read ovyyevs, cf. the apparatus criticus in Tischendorf.
Line 4f. συνειληφεν in Luke i. 36 also has the support of several. authorities (partly the same as those for ovyyevys), the more general reading being συνειληφνια, cf. Tischendorf. The shorter word is to be conjectured on account of the limited number of the letters.
Line 51. The quotation 3 from Luke i. 36 must certainly have been abridged : there is no room for υἱὸν ev γήρει αὐτῆς, nor for ovros.
Line 6f. rw exrw pretty certainly demands a preposition
Σ καὶ ov Ἐλισαβετ ἡ συγγενις σου Kat αὐτὴ συνειληφνια viov εν γηρει αὐτῆς Kat OUTOS μὴν ἐκτὸς ἐστ'ν αὑτὴ Τὴ καλουμενὴ στειρα.
APPENDIX ΠῚ 433
which governs the dative. The conjectural ἐν would, I think, fix the point of time thus: “ in the sixth month (reckoned back- wards).”’ ο eorw seems to be a sort of formula, “‘ that is to say ᾿᾿; the neuter is therefore not surprising. The name of some month ὦ is a very obvious-thing to supply. When we know that the time of the Baptist’s conception was determined by Chrysostom (II. 362 BCD ed. Montfaucon) after laborious calculation to be September, we naturally think of this month, and I have inserted above its Egyptian name. But it is evident that the restoration of the two lines is uncertain. ᾿
' Line 8 ff. From the supposed infinitive . . .]σειν and the accusative τὸν apxtorpa[. . . I have argued the existence of a governing verb eda. That οἰκετὴν refers to John. is an obvious deduction from the well-known saying of the Baptist about the “ shoe-latchet.” An excellent parallel, both real and verbal, to mpoBadi[fovra,? etc., is the passage quoted by Boissonade in the Thesaurus Graecae Linguae, VI. 1647, from an unprinted sermon by Chrysostom,? which calls John the Baptist τὸν τοῦ ἀύλου φωτὸς προβαδίσαντα λύχνον.
Line 9. Instead of Ιωαννην we might have Γαβριηλ, and in line 10 instead of αὐτου we might have ἡμων.
There is little to be said with regard to the recto. What can still be completed has been shown above. Lines 6-8 may have contained a sentence like “‘ And if God protecting looks down upon His friends, even the anger of a King is powerless.” The form of the quotation 4 from Matthew ii. 13 is remarkable; the Child is clearly not named, and instead of ‘‘ His mother” we have ‘“‘ Mary thy wife.’”’ I have found the name Mary in this context only in the Gospel of the Pseudo-Matthew xvii. 2, Tischen- dorf, p. 84: ‘ tolle Mariam et infantem.” ®
If the interpretation here given of the Cairo fragment is right in principle, it follows that we must be cautious in describing fragments with gospel words as “ fragments of a gospel.”
I subjoin a translation of the restored verso-text :—
1 Cf. a Christian inscription from Akhmim (?) in Lefebvre, Recueil No. 297, σήμερον ἥτις ἐστὶν Φαρμοῦθι R.
2 The word seems to be rare and to belong to the lofty style; so far it has been found only in Plutarch, Mor. 11. p. 707 B, Grege Naz. I. 1248 C (Migne), and the sermon by Chrysostom mentioned in the text. ᾿ ΒῚ ἀο not know whether this sermon has since been printed.
4... ayyedos κυρίου φαινεται κατ᾽ ovap τω Ιωσηφ λεγων" εγερθεις παραλαβε το παιδιον Kat THY μητερα avTou Kat φευγε εἰς Αιγυπτον.
5 Quoted by A. Resch, Das Kindheitsevangelium, Texte und Untersuchungen, X. 5, Leipzig, 1897, p. 156. For the form Mapia cf. above, pp. 121, n. 11 and 306, n. 6. [Also in the Gospel of Thomas, Latin text; see M. R. James, The Apocryphal New Testament, Oxford, 1924, p. 58. TR.]
434 APPENDIX III
VERSO
... let... interpret! to thee. But the archistrategus saith unto the virgin : “‘ Behold, Elizabeth thy kinswoman, she also hath conceived and the sixth month it is with her that was called barren.” In the sixth (month), therefore, that is in the month Thoth, did his mother conceive John. But it behoved the archistrategus to announce beforehand John, the servant who goeth before the coming of His Lord. . . .
It only remains now for somebody to identify the Cairo fragment. _I have not succeeded in discovering from what book it comes. Should someone who is wider read succeed in identifying the fragment, and thus perhaps put a speedy end to my restorations, I should be the first to remember that, as St. Paul says, ‘‘ we know in part.” 1 P. W. Schmiedel pointed out a slip that I made in the translation as printed in the first edition of this book.
APPENDIX IV
LUCIUS—LUKE
(First published in “Fesigabe fiiy A. von Harnack,’’ Tiibingen 1921, pp. 117-120, and now reproduced with slight alterations and the addition of two illustrations.)
THE question as to what was the original name underlying the contracted or pet form Λουκᾶς can now, I think, be answered with certainty. The view long ago advocated by Wilhelm Schulze,! that Λουκᾶς is the shortened form of Λούκιος, has been confirmed by epigraphical discoveries made by Sir William M. Ramsay.?
At Antioch in Pisidia a sanctuary of Men Ascaénus was dis- covered by this great authority on Anatolia, with various votive inscriptions dating from the Imperial period. One of these inscriptions furnished in the first. place a welcome new example ? of the form Λουκᾶς: a certain Λουκᾶς Τίλλιος Κρίτων performs, jointly with his wife, a vow to the god Men.* But the sequence of the three male names made it at once probable that the man’s name was really Latin, Lucius Tillius Crito.
W. Schulze’s conjecture is, however, raised to a certainty by two other inscriptions from the same sanctuary.§
”
1 Graeca Latina (a Gottingen ‘“‘ Einladungsprogramm,” 1901), p. 12.
2 Now most conveniently accessible in his James Sprunt Lectures of 1913, The Beaving of Recent Discoveries on the Trustworthiness of the New Testament, -London, etc., 1915, pp. 370-384. Sir William states (p. 372) that I had called his attention to an article by V. Schultze, in which the connexion of the names Lucius and Lucas was maintained, and that V. Schultze had sent him a copy of the article, ‘‘ but,”’ he says, “1 am at present not able to find the copy.” There must be some confusion here: I called Ramsay’s attention to W. Schulze, and his essay is duly cited on p. 383. '
3 The number of examples (outside the N.T. and the other early Christian writings) is not very large. So far I know only the following: two inscrip- tions from Egypt, C.1.G. III. 4759 [= Lepsius, Monum. aegypt. inscr. No. 114] “Μουκᾶς (on the Memnon colossus), and C.I.G. III. Add. 4700 k Aouxés (on a claw of the Great Sphinx); besides these C.I.L. VI. 17685 C. Iulius Lucas (a marble tablet, now at Rome). The statement in Ramsay, p. 383 n., is misleading owing to a misapprehension of a quotation in W. Schultze, p. 12.
4 P. 374, with drawing.
5 Pp. 376 ff., with drawings, which I here reproduce by Ramsay’s kind permission (Figs. 78 and 79).
435
436 APPENDIX IV The first (Fig. 78) runs :— Myvi εὐχήν]. ΤΓάμος ᾿Αβασκάϊντ-] ov μὲ γυν[αικός,] Λούκιος vids,
Πουμπούλιος υἷός.
That is to say, Gamus the son of Abascantus (together with his wife) and his two sons, Lucius and Pumpulius (= Pompilius), have performed a vow to Men.
The second dedication, obviously later, but doubtless emanating from the same family (Fig. 79), runs :—
Myvi εὐχήν. Tépos ᾿Αβασκάντον δὸς [5 καὶ Λουκᾶς καὶ ΠΙουμπούμλιος"ο καὶ Ἑὔδοξος.
The Lucius of the first inscription is called Lucas in the second : here we have the most authentic solution of the name-problem.* There is no need to prove other instances of the normal form of a name alternating with the pet name in the. same family; examples are conspicuous in texts both ancient and modern and will occur instantly to anyone who observes the daily habits of his family and friends.
*
When St. Paul was wintering at Corinth before his last journey to Jerusalem several representatives of his mission fields came to him in order to accompany him on his projected voyage to Syria.® The route was changed,‘ however, and led through Macedonia to Asia Minor, etc.
1 Ramsay, pp. 377 ff., conjectures, no doubt rightly, that Eudoxus was a third son born after the performance of the first vow; the mother probably was no longer alive at the time of the second dedication.
2 [W. M. Calder, Classical Review 38 (1924) 30, remarks that the Antioch inscriptions ‘ought not to be adduced ...as a proof that St. Luke’s formal name was Lucius. It is highly probable that it was; but neither can there be any doubt that Aouxds was short for Lucanus, Lucianus, possibly even Lucilius; and these inscriptions have exactly the same relevance to the problem as one proving the equivalence of Λουκᾶς and Lucanus would have.’’—The proviso is needed, though the inscriptions are offered here not as proof, but as evidence contributory to proof. Tr.]
2 Acts xx. 3. : 4 Acts xx. 3 f.
48. |
CVX H Wi PAK OCAB A CKAM
G. 78.—Votive Inscription of Gamus and his family to the god Men at och in Pisidia.. Imperial Period. By permission of Sir William M. ay.
va MHNIE YX HN ON
«
an ore “ae --.ὄ.
“FAMOCABACKANTOY W OC KAIAQVRACKAI |
KY \X A . -" So
TROYMTFOVMALOC
KALEVAS 20C
é——— ae
Fic. 79.—A second Votive Inscription of Gamus and his family to the god Men at Antioch in Pisidia. Imperial Period. By permission of Sir William M. Ramsay.
APPENDIX IV 437
Two passages in-the New Testament, independent of each other but unconsciously tallying in remarkable fashion, have preserved for us the names of some of the comrades who gathered round Paul at Corinth: one is in the apostle’s letter written at that time to the Christians at Ephesus, and the other is in the Acts of the Apostles.
In the little letter to the Ephesians which is contained in the sixteenth chapter of Romans! St. Paul says: ‘“ Timothy my fellow-worker saluteth you; and Lucius and Jason and Sosipater, my kinsmen.” The assistant, Tertius, who was writing the letter at the apostle’s dictation, adds a greeting of his own. Three others also send greetings, two of them, the host Gaius and Erastus the chamberlain of the city, being obviously Corinthians, while the third, brother Quartus, cannot be more closely. identified.
In Acts xx. 4 seven representatives of the churches are men- tioned by name as prepared to travel with St. Paul: Sopater (of Beroea), Aristarchus and Secundus (of Thessalonica), Gaius (of Derbe), Timothy, and Tychicus and Trophimus (of Asia).
If we compare these lists of names, we see that at the time when the letters were being written, before the plan of the voyage to Syria had been changed, two of St. Paul’s travelling com- panions, Timothy and So(si)pater ? were already at Corinth. Is it possible to identify any other individuals? We may reasonably decline to equate Gaius of Derbe with Paul’s host at Corinth; but there is another identification which is at least possible.
For in Acts xx. 5 we have the plain indication that the author of the “‘ we ’-narrative was also a member of the party—and he, according to the tradition of the early Church, which I take to be trustworthy, was Lucas (Luke).
In that case there were in St. Paul’s company before the departure from Corinth a Lucius and a Lucas at one and the same time. Or are the two really identical ?
The identification is found already in Origen*; and the Pseudo-
1 Rom. xvi. 21. Into the grounds of this hypothesis, which has my entire approval (cf. pp. 234 ff. above), I’shall not enter here. I would only remark that the little letter to the Ephesians (and the letter to the Romans) must have been written before the change in the plan for the Syrian journey; if Paul had contemplated the route vid Asia Minor at the time of writing he would surely have spoken about it in the letters. Rom. xv. 25 must be taken to refer to the sea-route from Corinth to:Syria.
2 The identity of Sopater and Sosipater is not to be doubted. We have here another method of abbreviating ἃ name: the shortening is medial instead of final. An investigation of this type of shortening would be desirable.
3 IV. 686 a, de la Rue; cf. P. W. Schmiedel in the Encyclopaedia Biblica III, col. 2833.
438 APPENDIX IV
Dorotheus, without any process of equating, calls the. Lucius of Romans xvi Λουκᾶς.1
Against this equation of Lucius = Lucas it has been objected by P. W. Schmiedel 3 that Luke was not.a Jew—it being assumed as certain that Lucius was a Jew. That Luke was not a Jew is concluded from Col. iv. 11; that Lucius was a Jew, from Rom. Xvi. 21. ,
But neither conclusion is at all certain. In the first place we do not know whether in the latter passage of συγγενεῖς μου refers to Lucius; it might be in apposition nly to Jason and Sosipater. Then too the passage in Colossians must certainly not be pressed as if Paul were saying that, apart from Aristarchus,? Marcus, and Jesus Justus, he had no Jewish fellow-workers whatever of any value to him. In Romans xvi. 3 ff. we hear him praising a number of Jewish fellow-workers, men and women, of high merit. The pessimistic remark in Col. iv. 11 was thrown off in a mood comparable with that of the peevish lines in Phil. ii. 20 f., which also need not be weighed too nicely. I for my part, therefore, would not venture to issue a birth-certificate for Luke on the strength of the passage in Colossians : we do not know for certain what his origin was. Thus the possibility that Lucius may be identical with the author of the “ we ’’ narrative is by no means to be rejected,* and the early tradition of the Church concerning Luke finds confirmation, perhaps, between the lines of the New Testament.
1 Encyclopaedia Biblica 111, col. 2828,
2 Jbid., 2833. ᾿
3 Here too it is not certain whether Paul is describing all three men as Jews; Aristarchus might be a pagan convert to Christianity.
4 That Paul elsewhere uses the pet form “ουκᾶς is no argument to the contrary. If the letters to the Colossians and to Philemon were written at Ephesus when Luke (Lucas) was in Paul’s company (Col. iv. 14; Philem. 24), the salutation of Lucius (= Luke) to the Ephesians in Rom. xvi, 21-becomes particularly intelligible; Luke would be known personally to the Ephesians— as is probable also on other grounds.
APPENDIX V ‘THE SYNAGOGUE INSCRIPTION OF THEODOTUS AT JERUSALEM
In the course of his successful excavations in the city of David at Jerusalem (November 1913 to March 1914) Raimond Weill 1 discovered the remains of some baths which he assigns, no doubt correctly, to the period before the destruction of Jerusalem. In a cistern belonging to the establishment he had the good fortune to find a Greek inscription which may be regarded as one of the most important discoveries of the last ten years. It has many times already been mentioned, printed, and admirably commented upon?; but concerning its age agreement has not yet been
1 Soon after the conclusion of his excavation Weill gave a public lecture on the subject at Jerusalem, and on 29 May, 1914, he presented a provisional report to the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres. The report of his excavations (‘‘ La Cité de David. Compte rendu des fouilles exécutées, ἃ Jérusalem, sur la site de la ville primitive. Campagne de 1913-14’) appeared in the Revue des Etudes Juives, 69 (1919), 70 (1920), and 71 (1920), with plates in the “ Annexe ’’ to vol. 69; the Theodotus inscription is on plate XXVa. This report has also appeared in a separate edition published by Paul Geuthner, Paris, 1920, with a portfolio of 26 plates (cf. Dalman, Zeitschrift des Deutschen Paldstina-Vereins 45 [1922], p. 22, who presumably had not seen the three volumes of the Revue des Etudes Juives),
37, I do not know the full extent of the literature, and have not myself seen all of the following: facsimile in Rev. des Et. J., 69 (1919) ‘‘ Annexe,” plate XXVa; R. Weill, 7bid. 71 (1920), pp. 30-34; Th. Reinach, 7bid., pp. 46-56, with mention of a communication by Clermont-Ganneau to the Académie des Inscriptions on 11 June, 1920, to which Reinach himself replied on 18 June, 1920; Weill, Reinach, and Clermont-Ganneau suggest a date before 70 a.D.; Clermont-Ganneau published the gist of his communication in a periodical, ‘Syria’ 1 (1920), pp. 190-197; cf. also Revue Bleue, 20 Aug., 1920, p. 590 f.; Samuel Klein, Jidisch-Paldstinisches Corpus Inscrip- tionum, Wien, 1920, pp. 101-104; L. H. Vincent, Revue Biblique 30 (1921), pp. 247 ff. (first suggested the reign of Trajan, but now assigns the inscription to the period before 70 a.p.); H. Lietzmann, Zeitschrift fiir die neutesta- mentliche Wissenschaft 20 (1921), pp. 171 ff. (say early Imperial period) ; N. A. Bees, Byzantinisch-Neugriechische Jahrbiicher 2 (1921), p. 259 (reign of Trajan); A. Marmorstein, Palestine Exploration Fund Quarterly State- ment, 1921, pp. 23-28; X., Revue Archéologique 5° 5. 13 (1921), p. 142; P. Thomsen, Zeitschrift des Deutschen Paldstina-Vereins 44 (1921), pp. 143 f.; 4., Νέα Σιών τό (1921), pp. 43-46; G. Dalman, Zeitschr. d. Deutschen Palastina-Vereins 45 (1922), pp. 29 f. (before 70 a.D., whereas in the Palastina- jahrbuch 11 (1915), pp. 75f., he had suggested the late Roman period). The inscription was mentioned (without text) further by G. L. Robinson, American Journal of Archaeology 21 (1917), p. 84, and (with strange exuber-
439
440 APPENDIX V ;
attained. I think, however, that this question is comparatively very simple to solve. I will therefore here briefly indicate my view of the subject, but without any intention of myself opening a discussion of any of the other problems. To the obliging courtesy of the Société des Etudes Juives at Paris I am indebted, through the kind offices of Professor Heinrich Lowe, of Berlin, for permission to reproduce here a facsimile of the inscription (Fig. 80). Letters which seem to be legible with certainty, though they may appear mutilated in the photograph, I have not enclosed in brackets in the transcription which follows.
Θεόδοτος Overrynvod,! ἱερεὺς ? καὶ ἀρχισυνάγωγος, vids ἀρχισυν[αγώ-] γίο]υ, υἱωνὸς ἀρχισυν[α]γώγου,3 ᾧκο- δόμησε τὴν συναγωγ[ὴ]ν εἰς dv[dy]vur-
5. σ[ω] νόμου καὶ εἰς [δ]ιδαχ[ὴ]ν ἐντολῶν 4 καὶ τὸν ξενῶνα ὅ κα[ὶ τὰ] δώματα ὁ καὶ τὰ χρη- σ[τ]ήρια τῶν ὑδάτων 7 εἰς κατάλυμα τοῖ-
ς [χ]ροήζουσιν ἀπὸ τῆς ξέ[ν]ης, ἣν ἐθεμε- A[tw]oav 8 οἱ πατέρες [α]ὐτοῦ καὶ οἱ πρε-
IO σ[β]ύτεροι 9 καὶ Σιμων[(]δης.}9
Theodotus the son of Vettenus,! priest? and ruler of the synagogue, son of aruler of the synagogue, son’s son of a ruler of the synagogue,’ built the synagogue for reading (5) of the law and for teaching of the commandments,? also the strangers’ lodging 5 and the chambers ὁ and the conveniencies of waters? for an inn for them that need it from abroad, of which (synagogue) his fathers and the elders ὃ and Simonides 10 did lay the foundation.®
ances owing to disturbance of international communication between scholars during the war) in my Evangelischer Wochenbrief (Protestant Weekly Letter), No. 47 of 23 Oct., 1915, and No. 63 of 12 Feb., 1916.
1 Vettenus, the father of Theodotus, probably possessed Roman citizenship through some member of the gens Vettena (Lietzmann, p. 172).
2 It does not appear to me probable that Theodotus was an active priest at the Temple at Jerusalem; the word points rather to descent from a priestly family; cf. the numerous examples from Rome in Nikolaus Miller, Die Inschviften der jidischen Katakombe am Monteverde zu Rom, Nos. 35, 98, 113, 123, 152, and notes.
3 The congregation over which Theodotus presided had therefore seen the rulership of the synagogue in the hands of the same family for three generations.
4 Lietzmann, p. 171, refers aptly to Luke iv. 16-21 and Acts xiii. 15 ff.
5 There are other instances in antiquity of synagogues with a khan attached.
5 δώματα in the sense of ‘‘ chambers ”’ is suggested by Modern Greek [if not by older usage, 6.6. in Homer. TR.]. ΄ 1 For ritual washings. [For notes 8 to 10 see next page.
‘suueg ‘saain[{ sapnyq sep ογοῖοος
911 10 uorsstuiad Ag “αν of ar0jaq ‘waresnial 70 snzoOposyy, Jo uondisosuy onSoseuds—og “ong
᾿ΑΡΡΕΝΡΙΧΥ͂ 441
This inscription affords us an exceedingly vivid glimpse of the religious life of the holy city as the central resort of pilgrims from the Diaspora. The question of its age is not at all com- plicated. It may be said of any and every Jewish inscription that turns up in the rubbish heaps of Jerusalem, if it is in Greek and in characters of the early Imperial period, that it must have been written before 70 A.D. From that year onwards for a long period no Jew could settle within the city area,1—to say nothing of building, and even erecting a synagogue there. That seems to be certain; and therefore the inscription (testifying as it does to an undisturbed stream of pilgrims and an unbroken continuity of the congregation’s office-bearers) must belong to the period before 70 A.p.2. It is an important original fragment of the actual background of the primitive apostolic cult of Christ at Jerusalem.
That we have here in the synagogue of Theodotus the “ syna- gogue of the Libertines ’’ mentioned in Acts vi. 9, as several of the scholars cited here have assumed, is not impossible, but in my view not probable. I have already pointed out elsewhere 3 that it is most satisfactory to consider the ‘‘ synagogue of the Freedmen ”’ as made up of former Imperial slaves. It was only their common membership of Caesar’s household (Καίσαρος οἰκία, Phil. iv. 22) that furnished a principle for forming a congregation ; there would have been little sense in a union of freedmen of various private owners at random to form a particular synagogue.” With regard to Theodotus we do not even know whether he was descended from a freedman’s family.*
1 Cf. Schiirer, Geschichte des jiidischen Volkes 1 *4, pp. 649 and 703.
2 The shape of the letters is entirely consistent with this date.
8 In Nikolaus Miller, Die Inschriften der jiidischen Katakombe am Monte- verde, Ὁ. 99.
4 Cf. Lietzmann, p. 172.
Continuation of notes to page 440 :— 81 take this quite literally : the foundation stone was laid by the father -
and (then still living) grandfather of Theodotus jointly with the college of elders of the congregation and one Simonides (a specially munificent donor) ; . but the completion of the building was reserved for Theodotus. It illus- trates beautifully 1 Cor. iii. 10: “1 have laid the foundation, and another buildeth thereon.”” Not so very many years (Lietzmann, p. 171) need have elapsed between the laying of the foundation stone and the completion of the building.
9 A very important example of the use of the title ““ presbyter’ in the congregation of a Jewish synagogue in apostolic times.
10 The identification of this Simonides with one of the sons of Flavius Josephus I consider quite impossible.
APPENDIX VI
THE DIPTYCH OF M. VALERIUS QUADRATUS, A VETERAN OF THE JERUSALEM CAMPAIGN
A SINGLE individual out of the otherwise unknown! thousands in the army led by Titus against Jerusalem is revealed to us by a wooden tablet which was discovered in March, 1909, together with numerous papyri of the 2nd century A.D. at Philadelphia in the Faydm, and is now preserved in the Museum at Alexandria.? A generation after the destruction of the holy city a strange shadow is cast by that tragedy of world-history upon the personal fortunes of a simple veteran in Egypt.
We have in the tablet one half of a diptych (folded pair of writing-tablets) dated 2 July, 94 a.p., which was covered with writing both on the outer and on the inner side. The texts thereon contained are made up of extremely various components and present a number of most difficult problems for criticism,
1 It may be permitted here to remark that the idea of “the Unknown. Warrior ’”’ goes back to Johann Gabriel Seidl (1804-75); cf. his poem, ‘“‘ Der todte Soldat’ (‘‘ The Dead Soldier ’’) in Bifolien®, Wien, 1841, pp. 272 f. (not in the first edition, 1836), beginning ‘“‘ Auf ferner fremder Aue Da liegt ein todter Soldat, Ein Ungezahlter, Vergessner, Wie brav er gekampft auch hat,’”’ etc. Seidl, I am informed by Max Herrmann, was inspired by these words of Oliver Goldsmith which he prefixes as a motto to the poem: ‘‘ The most precious tears are those with which Heaven bedews the unburied head of a soldier.” [The Vicar of Wakefield, ch. 21, Globe ed., p. 50a. ‘‘ Afar in a foreign meadow There lies a soldier dead, A man uncounted, forgotten, Though bravely he fought and bled.” Thus the Vienna lyric poet—a classical archaeologist moreover by profession—who is remembered as the successful adapter of the words of the Austrian national anthem. His tribute to Goldsmith deserves our gratitude, but—the idea of burying an Unknown Warrior, a private soldier of unrevealed identity, in the national fane, is due to the Rev. David Railton, M.C., vicar of Margate, who had served as a chaplain in France. See ‘‘ Notes and Queries,” 12 S. vii. 449, on the authority of The Times, 13 Nov., 1920. TR.]
2 Editio princeps by Gustave Lefebvre in the Bulletin de la Société Archéo- logique d’Alexandrie, No. 12 (1910), pp. 39 ff., with the facsimiles reproduced here in Figs. 81 and 82; cf. Wilcken, Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung 5, pp. 434 f., and Chrestomathie, No. 463; P.M. Meyer refers me also to Mispoulet, Revue historique de droit frangais et étranger, 1911, pp. 5 ff.; E. Breccia,, Musée d’Alexandrie, Iscrizioni greche e latini, No. 61a; Lesquier, L’armée romaine d’Egypte, 1918, pp. 297 ff. :
: 442
APPENDIX. VI 443
both in text and subject matter, which must here remain undis- cussed.
For the following arrangement of the text I am indebted to the kindness of Paul M. Meyer, to whom also is due the trans- lation in all essential parts. He adopted the grouping of the various portions of the text proposed by Lesquier :—
(a) and (δ) cols. I. and II. 1-9: Nine witnesses and a testatio privata, with reference to (c) and (e), by M. Valerius Quadratus, a veteran, 2 July, 94 A.D.;
(c) col. II. 10-20: Edict of Domitian, 87-88 a.p., relating to concessions for veterans, the last part wanting;
(4) col. III. 1-7 : Ordinance of the Emperor (not before 93 A.D.), based on a military diploma, the first. part wanting ;
(6) col. III. 8-10: License by the Praefect, x July, 94 A.D., for drawing up the festatio privata ; :
(f) col. III. 1x-16: testatio privata of the veteran, 2 July, 94 A.D., relating to the birth of his children.
The outer side (Figure 81) (a) Col. I. (The nine witnesses 1) :—
C. Epidius, C. F(tlius), Pol(lia tribi), Bassus, vet(eranus). L. Petronius, L. f(ilius), Pol(lia tribu), Crispus, vet(eranus). 5 M. Plotius, M. f(ilius), Pol(lia tribu), Fuscus, vet(eranus). M. Antonius, M. f(ilius), Pol(lia tribu), Celer, vet(eranus). P. Audasius, P. f(tlius), Pol(lia tribu), 10 Paullus, vet(eranus). 11/12 M. Antonius Lon/gus Pull<us>*, vet(eranus). 13/14 L. Petronius Niger,|vet(eranus). 15/16 L. Valerius Clemen<s>,/vet(eranus). 17/18 M. Antonius Ger|manus, vet(eranus).
(b) Col. 11. 1-9 :-—
L. Nonio Calpurnio Torquato Asprenate, T. Sextio Magto Laterano co(nsulibu)s, VI Non(as) Julias, anno XIII* Imp- (eratoris) Caesaris Domitiant
1 It is remarkable that several of the cognomina of these veterans occur also as early Christidn names of persons: Crispus, Paulus, Niger, Clemens.
2 Cf. p. 189, 0. I above.
3 2 July, 94 A.D.
444 APPENDIX VI
Aug(usti) Germanici, mense Epip, die VIII, Alex(andriae) ad Aegyptum,
M. Valerius M. f(ilius) Pol(lia tribu) Quadratus, veteranus, dimissus honesta
5 missione ex leg(ione) X Fretense, testatus est se descriptum
et recognitum fecisse ex tabula aenea quae est fixa
in Caesareo Magno}, escendentium scalas secundas
sub porticum dexteriorem secus aedem Veneris mar-
moreae in pariete in qua scriptum est, et id quod infra scripitum es[t]: 3
(c) Col. II. 10-20 :—
10 Imp(erator) Caesar divi Vespasiani f(ilius) Domitianus Aug- (ustus) Germanicus, pontifex maximus trib(unicia) potest(ate) VII imp(erator) XIII® censor perpetuus p(ater) platriae) dicit:* “‘ visum est mihi® edicto significare universorulm] vestrorum ὃ υἱ veterant milites omnibus vectigalib[us] portitoribus 7 publicis liberati immunes esse deben[t] ; 15. ipst coniuges liberique eorum parentes qui conubia [eo-] rum sument ® omni optumo ture c(ives) R(omani) esse possint et om[nt] immunitate liberati apsolutique sint® et omnem i[mmu-] nitatem q(ut) s(upra) s(criptt) 19 s(unt) parentes liberique eorum tdem 11 iuri[s] idem 11 condicionis sint utique praedia domus tabern[ae] 20 invitos intemniqui 15 veleranoss . .onis....... a8
1 With Wilcken I take this to be the temple of the Emperor at Alexandria. 2 On scriptum est = γέγραπται cf. the references given above, p. 337, ἢ. 3. 3 87-88 A.D.
4 Cf. the remarks about λέγει, Ὁ. 375 above.
5 Cf. the apostolic decree, Acts xv. 28: ἔδοξεν γὰρ τῷ πνεύματι τῷ. ἁγίῳ καὶ
ἡμῖν. 56. The text is corrupt. Lesquier conjectured that the original read vestrum.
Allowance has been made for this in the translation.
7 A mistake in writing for portitoriis (Wilcken).
8 The text is corrupt and requires emendation. Lesquier reads: convivi [eo]rum sunt. ᾿
9. This sentence also is out of shape. Lesquier reads: [19] omnem immuni- tatem. '
10 P, M. Meyer reads: s(ub)s(cripts).
41 A mistake in writing for eiusdem (Wilcken).
43 P.M. Meyer : indemnesque ?
Fic. 81.—Diptych of M. Valerius Quadratus, a veteran of the Jerusalem campaign, Alexan- dria, 2 July, 94 A.D. Outer Side. Wooden Tablet from Philadelphia in the Fayim. Now in the Museum at Alexandria.
Fic. 82.—Diptych of M. Valerius Quadratus, a veteran of the Jerusalem campaign, Alexandria, 2 July, 94 Α.Ὁ. Inner Side. Wooden Tablet from Philadelphia in the Fayim. Now in the Museum at Alexandria.
APPENDIX VI 445
The inner side (Figure 82).
(4) Col. III. 1-7 :— eWay ρος ὦ vjeteranorum cum uxoribus et liberis s(upra) s(criptis) 1 in aere in- cist 3 aut si qui caelibes sint cum is quas postea duxissent dumtaxat singult singulas qui militaverunt Hierosolymmts 5 in leg(tone) X Fretense dimmissorum honesta missione stipendts eme- 5 ritis per Sex(tum) Hermetidium Campanum 4 legatum Aug(ustt) pro praetore V K(alendas) Ian(uarias) Sex. Pompeio Collega Q. Peducaeo Priscino co(nsulibu)s > gai militare coeperunt P. Galevio Trachalo Ti. Catio® εἰ T. Flavio Cn. Aruleno? co(nsulibu)s.”
(e) Col. III, 8-10 :—
Ex permissu M. Iuni Rufi praefecti Aegypti L. Nonio Calpurnio
Torquato Asprenate T. Sextio Magio Laterano co(nsulibu)s, K(alendis) Iulis, anno
το XIII Imp(eratoris) Caesaris Domitiani Aug(usti) Germanici mense Epip die VII8
(f) Col. III. 11-16 :—
Ibi M. Valerius. M. f(tlius) Pol(lia tribu) Quadratus coraam ὃ ac praesentibus eis
qui signaturt evant testatus est iuratusque dixit per I(ovem) o(ptumum) M(aximum), et genium
sacratissimt Imp(eratoris) Caesaris Domitiant Aug(usti) Ger- manict
in militia sibi L. Valerium Valentem et Valeriam Heraclun 10 et Valeriam
15 Artemin omnes tres s(upra) s(criptos) natos esse eosque in aere
incisos civitatem
Romanam consecutos esse beneficio eiusdem optumi principis.
1 P.M. Meyer : s(ub)s(criptis).
2 Pp. M. Meyer : incisz(s).
3 A vulgar formation on the analogy of Methymna, Calymna, etc.
‘ This is our first knowledge of this governor of Judaea, which became an independent province in 70 a.p. (Wilcken).
§ 93 A.D. 86. 68 A.D. 7 69 A.D.
81 July, 94 a.p. 9. = coram.
10 The girl’s second name was ‘Hpakdois.
446 APPENDIX VI
The outer side (Figure 81). (a) Col, I. (the nine witnesses). Cf. p. 443 above. (6) Col. 11. 1-9.:—
In the consulship of L. Nonius Calpurnius Torquatus Asprenas and Τὶ Sextius Magius Lateranus, the 6th before the Nones of July in the 13th year } of the Imperator Caesar Domitianus Augustus Germanicus, in the month Epip, on the 8th day, at Alexandria by Egypt, M. Valerius (son of Marcus, of the Pollian Tribe) Quadratus, veteran, discharged with an honourable (5) discharge 2 from the 1oth Fretensian Legion, declared before witnesses that he had made a copy and certification of the table of brass which is set up in the Great Caesareum ὃ (on the wall beside the temple of the Marble Venus under the porch upon the right hand as one goeth up the second stairs), on which it is written even as it is written below :—
(c) Col. II. το--20 :—
(10) The Imperator Caesar (son of the divine Vespasian) Domitianus Augustus Germanicus, Chief Pontiff, the 7th time invested with tribunician power, Imperator the 13th,4 Perpetual Censor, Father of his Country, saith δ: “Tt seemed good to me ὅ to signify by decree: The veteran soldiers among you all (?) ought to be made free and exempted from all customs, haven- dues and tolls; (15) they themselves, their wives and children and their parents who are living in wedlock (?) shall be able to be Roman citizens with every and the best right and shall be free and released with all exemption; and with respect to all exemption their parents and children, who are written above, shall be of the same right and of the same estate (as they); surely their lands, houses, booths shall... . the veterans against their will and without their fault (oy without damage?) ... .”
The inner side (Figure 82).
, (4) Col. ITI. 1--7 :— ᾿ . ..{? The Imperator has allowed the citizenship of those vJeterans (with their wives and children above written, inscribed on brass, or if they are unmarried, with-those whom they afterwards shall have married, each severally) who have served at Hierosolymna 7 in the roth Fretensian Legion, [having been] discharged with an honourable discharge, after full time served, (3) by Sex[tus] Hermetidius Campanus, Imperial Propraetorian Governor,® the 5th before the Kalends of January in the consulship of Sex[tus] Pompeius Collega and Ὁ. Peducaeus Priscinus ®, and who began to serve in the consul- ship of P. Galerius Trachalus and Ti. Catius 19 and in that of T. Flavius and Cn. Arulenus.’”’ 11
(6) Col. IIT. 8-10 :—-
By permission of M, Junius Rufus, Praefect of Egypt, in the consulship of L. Nonius Calpurnius Torquatus Asprenas and T. Sextius Magius Lateranus, the Kalends of July in the (10) 13th year of the Imperator Caesar Domitianus Augustus Germanicus, in the month Epip, on the 7th day.¥
(f) Col. III. 11-16 :-— :
There 13 M. Valerius (son of Marcus, of the Pollian Tribe) Quadratus in his own person and in the presence of those who were about to seal [as wit- nesses] declared and swore on oath by Jupiter Most Good and Most Great and the genius of the most holy Imperator Caesar Domitianus Augustus Ger- manicus that to him duting his service L. Valerius Valens and Valeria Hera- clus and Valeria (15) Artemis, all three above written, were born, and that they, inscribed on brass, have obtained Roman citizenship by favour of the same most good prince.
1 2 July, 94 A.D. 2 [1.6., after serving his fulltime. Tr.] 3 At Alexandria, cf. p. 444, τι. 1 above. 4 87-88 a.D. 5 Cf. p. 444, π. 4 above. 6 Cf. p. 444, n. 5 above.
τ Cf. p. 445, 0. 3. 8 Of Judaea. Cf. p. 445, n. 4. 9. 28 Dec., 93 A.D. 10 68 A.D., i.¢., after the Jewish insurrection had begun.
1 69 A.D. 12 1 July, 94 A.D. 18. At Alexandria.
APPENDIX VII THE EPITAPH OF REGINA, A ROMAN JEWESS
In my remarks on the word ecclesia 1 I have pointed out that, before the vocabulary of the Greek-speaking followers of the Christ cult became latinised, a whole process of secular latinisation had been going on, the results of which (in part at least) could be simply taken over by Latin-speaking Christians when they came to translate into Latin. Similarly among the Jews of the Diaspora a praeparatio latina for the coming Latin Bible of the Christians had been taking place. The language of the Diaspora was, it is true, Greek as a rule, even at Rome; but there were Jews who spoke Latin. The epitaph? of Regina, a Roman Jewess (beginning of the 2nd cent. A.p., Figure 83), shows on an extensive scale that Latin-speaking Jews possessed Latin render- ings for Biblical language (or might it be translations of parts of the Old Testament ?) at a time anterior to the Latin translation of the Bible which is known to us.
I give here the text with translation, appending the notes which I wrote for the edition by Nikolaus Miiller and Bees. They show how strongly the Latin of the Vulgate Old and New Testament is anticipated in the inscription, of course in con- formity with the linguistic usage of the period.®
2 Pp. 112 f, above.
2 Nikolaus Miller, Die Inschriften der jiidischen Katakombe am Monteverde, No. 145 (pp. 133 ff.). As regards the date see there (p. 133) the careful examination of the evidence by several epigraphists.
3 For all other information I may refer to the searching commentary by Bees. [The name Regina is first encountered here. Editors suggest that it is a translation of the Hebrew nabp (malkah) ‘‘ queen.’’ In the Museum at South Shields there is a sepulchral monument representing a woman seated, with flowers in her lap, a jewel-box in her right hand, and implements of needlework in the left. The ungrammatical inscription, probably of the 3rd cent. A.D., reads: d.m. Regina liberta et coniuge Bavates Palmyrenus, natione Catuallauna, an. xxx., ‘‘ sacred to the memory of Regina, freedwoman and wife of Barate of Palmyra, she being of the (South British) nation of the Catuallauni, aged 30.’’ There follows an inscription in Palmyrene characters : “ Regina, the freedwoman of Barate. Alas!’’ Thus the theory of a Semitic origin of the name Regina seems to find confirmation in Roman Britain. Cf. Dessau, Inscriptiones Latinas Selectae, No. 7063; J. Collingwood Bruce,
447
448 APPENDIX VII
Hic Regina sita est tali contecta sepulcro, quod coniunx statuit respondens eius amori. Haec post bis denos secum transsegerat annum et quartum mensem restantibus octo diebus,
5 rursum victura, reditura ad lumina rursum. Nam sperare potest ideo, quod surgat in aevom promissum, quae vera fides, dignisque piisque, quae meruit sedem venerandi ruris habere. Hoc ἐϊδὲ praestiterit pietas, hoc vita pudica,
10 hoc et amor generis, hoc observantia legis, coniugit meritum, cutus tibi gloria curae. Horum factorum tibt sunt spberanda futura, de quibus et coniunx maestus solacia quaertt.
Here Regina is buried, in sepulchre so fair, which her husband, requiting her love, hath erected.’ She, after twice ten years with him, had ended a year and a fourth month, eight days remain- ing; (5) again she will live, she will return to the light again. For she is able to hope that she rise again for evermore as hath been promised—and this faith is true—to the worthy and the godly, she who hath deserved to have a throne in that blessed country. This - will thy godliness have gotten for thee, this thy grave life, (10) this also thy love of thy stock, this thy observation of the law, thy deserts in respect of marriage, the glory whereof was thy care. For these things done thou mayest hope things to come, whence also thy sorrowful husband seeketh consolation.
Discoveries in the Roman Camp on the Lawe, South Shields, 1884; Archaeologia Aeliana 10(1885) 223 ff., with drawing. Thomas Hodgkin, History of England from the Earliest Times to the Norman Conquest, London, 1906, p. 58, says: “The blended nationality, the British girl bought, enfranchised, loved, and too soon lost by the Syrian,—merchant perchance or usurer,—who followed the flight of the eagles of Rome, are all brought before us by these few roughly carved lines, and they tell a story of world-wide empire, in which, perhaps, the Britain of our own day could offer the closest parallel to Rome.’’ ΤᾺ. 1 [The following is a rough attempt to suggest the metre of the original :—
Here Regina is laid, she is covered in sepulchre seemly,
Fitting her love, which her spouse, requiting it, here hath erected.
She, after twice ten years spent with him, yet another had ended,
Also four months of the next, save eight more days that were lacking.
5 Yet she shall live once more, once more come back to the daylight. Yea, for she still may hope that she rise to the life everlasting Promised afore—this faith is true—to the worthy and godly,
She who deserved her throne to possess in that country most blessed. This will have gotten for thee thy godliness, graveness of living,
1o This thy love of the stock, thine observation of God’s law, And thy deserts as to marriage, the glory whereof was thy study. These things done by thee, thou canst hope for things to come after, And from the same thy spouse now sorrowing seeketh his comfort. Tr.)
"αν 1.90 pu
ay} jo Suruut
Q
596
10 ‘ssudUPI3JET OUPTISIID OVSN] q 1651 NL
WOY 38 ΘΡαΘΛΘΏΠΟΙΝ 911 UO Quiose}yeD 982} Ul
912 τι MON ‘ssomof ΠΈΠΟΝ e Ἕ
uiSay jo ydezidq—€g “Ol.
APPENDIX VII 449
This Roman text of the early 2nd century, remarkable merely as a Jewish inscription in hexameters,! reproduces in latinised form no unimportant part of the religious vocabulary of Judaism. I have collected instances :—
Line 1. contego referring to interment: Ecclus. xxxviii. 16, contege corpus.
Line 3. évansigo in a temporal sense: frequently, 6.5. Gen. xli. 53, transactis annis.
Line 5. rursum vivo: Job xiv. 14, rursum vivat. (The thought is not parallel.) Jumen: Psalm lvi. 13 (lv. 12), eripuisti animam meam de morte, . . . ut placeam coram Deo in lumine viventium.
Line 6. spevo, also in line 12, with eschatological content : frequently, e.g. 2 Macc. xii. 44, nisi enim eos resurrecturos speraret (cf. sperare quod surgat). surgo eschatologically : frequently in the N.T. i aevom: Ecclus. xxiv. 46; xli. 16; Baruch iii. 3.
Line 7. promitio (and promissum) used of divine promises : very frequently in O.T. and N.T. quae vera fides (a little sentence in apposition) refers, not to the ‘“‘ true faith’’ of Regina (Bor- mann), 2 but to the trustworthiness of God who makes the promise, as in Rom. iii. 3, numquid incredulitas illorum fidem Dei evacua- bit? For the whole sentence in lines 6 and 7, up to this point, cf. Titus i. 2, in spem vitae aeternae quam promisit qui non mentitur Deus. dignis in an eschatological context : Luke xx. 35, qui digni habebuntur saeculo illo et resurrectione ex mortuis; 2 Thess, i. 5, ut digni habeamini in regno Dei.
Line 8. meruit: Esther xvi. 18, Deo reddente ei quod meruit. sedes eschatologically : Matt. xix. 28, sedebitis super sedes duo- decim; cf. Matt. viii. 11, recumbent in regno coelorum; Rev. iii. 21, sedere mecum in throno meo.
Line 9. hoc tibi praestiterit pietas: Deut. viii. 17, fortitudo mea et robur manus meae haec mihi omnia praestiterunt; 1 Tim. ii. 10, quod decet mulieres promittentes pietatem per bona opera. vita pudica: 1 Tim. iii. 11, mulieres similiter pudicas.
Line 10. genus used of the Jewish people: frequently, e.g. Phil. iii. 5, ego ex genere Israel. observantia legis : 2 Macc. vi. 11, propter religionem et observantiam.
1 This adaptation to the Gentile world surrounding them had been attempted by the Jews in their literature long before this date (cf. the epic poets Philo and Theodotus); but instances of it had very seldom been observed in epitaphs before this one was found. The form here is fairly non-literary. C. C, Edgar has recently published epitaphs of Greek Jews of the time of Augustus from Tell el Yahoudieh (Leontopolis), Annales du Service des Antiquités de l’Egypte, 22, pp. 7 ff. Five rather long ones among them are in elegiac couplets, Extremely interesting texts.
2 Wiener Studien 34 (1912), pp. 368 f.
450 APPENDIX VII
Lines 11 and 12: cf. for instance Ecclus. xvi. 15, faciet uni- cuique secundum meritum operum suorum; Rom. ii. 6f., qui reddet unicuique secundum opera eius, iis quidem, qui secundum patientiam boni operis gloriam et honorem et incorruptionem quaerunt, vitam aeternam.
Line 13. de quibus . . . solacia quaerit : Heb. vi. 18, ut fortis- simum solatium habeamus, qui confugimus ad tenendam proposi- tam spem.
These parallels go’ far towards indicating the importance of the Regina inscription in the history of religion. Bormann’s original hypothesis } of Pauline influence discernible in the religious utterance of the text was instructive, though mistaken: it was only possible because of really great kinship existing between St. Paul and the Judaism which speaks in this inscription. Paul and the inscription are both in a like degree influenced, in their religious hopes, by the best forces of Pharisaism, which (cf. Matt. xxiii. 15) carried on propaganda even beyond the bounds of its - mother-country. The opposition between Paul and the obvious belief in requital shown by the inscription is not insurmountable; Paul by no means did away with the idea of requital for good and evil. The Regina inscription is also rich in contribution to the history of the popular ideal of womanhood ? in antiquity, especially as prevailing amongst the Jews.
1 Wiener Studien 34 (1912), pp. 368 f. 2 Cf. p. 314 ἢ. above.
‘purser, Joposyy jo uorsstmsed Aq ‘pomsg jeuedwy ᾿ΒΠΊΘΙΙΝ 28 eee], 91} UT 572895. ystmef oy} 10} uordrOsuT—bg ΘΙ
APPENDIX VIII A JEWISH INSCRIPTION IN THE THEATRE AT MILETUS
ON the 17th April, 1906, Theodor Wiegand showed us a number of inscriptions on the seats of the theatre of Miletus, which dates from the Roman period. Among them was the following Jewish inscription in the fifth row from below in the second block (xepxés) from the west. It is 4 feet broad, and with its letters 1} to 2} inches in height partly reminds one of the Jewish inscription from Corinth. I give it here in facsimile (Figure 84) from a squeeze kindly made for me in 1907 by August Frickenhaus at the instance of Wiegand.
The inscription, doubtless of Imperial age, runs thus :—
TOTIOSEIOYAEWNTWNKAIOEOZEBION
Τόπος Εἰουδέων ? τῶν καὶ Θεοσεβίον.8 Place of the Jews, who also are called God-fearing.
Of Jews at Miletus nothing was previously known except a letter from the proconsul of Asia to the authorities of this town, saying that the Jews are not to be prevented from keeping their Sabbaths, practising their religious customs, and managing their revenues after their own manner. Our inscription is an original document proving the existence of the Jewish colony at Miletus. St. Paul perhaps, when he stayed at Miletus,® came into some sort of contact with the Jews living there.®
Very remarkable is the form of the name “ God-fearing.’’? The form “ they that fear God’’ 8 is very well known, from the Acts of the Apostles and other sources; ® it denotes pagans who
1 Cf. p. 16, n. 7 and Figure 2 above.
2 Te. ᾿Ιουδαίων.
3 Ie. Θεοσεβίων. Ziebarth, Kulturbilder aus griechischen Stddten, p. 73, cites this inscription erroneously in the form τόπος Εἰουδαίων φιλοσεβάστων.
4 Josephus, Anit. XIV. x. 21; cf. Schiirer, III.* p. 68 [Eng. trs., Div. 11,, vol. 2, p. 258].
δ Acts xx. 15,17; and 2 Tim. iv. 20.
6 It is probable that, wherever there were Jews, Paul first sought to open communications with them.
7 Θεοσέβιοι. 8 φοβούμενοι OF σεβόμενοι (metuentes) τὸν θεόν.
® Cf. Schiirer, III? p.123f. (Eng. trs., Div. 11., vol. 2, p. 314.}
451
452 APPENDIX VIII
were in close touch with the Jewish worship, if not officially connected as proselytes. In the Milesian inscription the Jews themselves are similarly styled Θεοσέβιοι and the word must have already been felt to be a proper name.1 So far as I know it occurs elsewhere only as a proper name. As I read the actual inscription there at Miletus I wondered that it did not run ‘“‘ Place of the Jews and of those who are called God-fearing.” But there can be no doubt that ‘‘ God-fearing ”’ is here an appellation of the - Jews.2, The imperfect execution of the inscription allows us, perhaps, to suppose that the Milesian Jewish community, like that of Corinth,? was not very wealthy.
The inscription is important in social history chiefly as Showing that the Milesian Jews did not share the antipathy of their strict co-religionists to the theatre, of which there are frequent signs elsewhere.4 The process of Hellenisation or secularisation that we have frequently observed in Jewish inscriptions ὅ is reflected also in this one, put up in a pagan theatre by worshippers of the One God (or by the theatre authorities for them). We are reminded of the Jew Philo of Alexandria, who relates ® that he was once present at a performance of a tragedy by Euripides.
1 As shown by the τῶν καί, which should be regarded in the same way as the "ὃ καί found as a stereotyped form with double names (Bibelstudien, Ὁ. 181 ff.; Bible Studies, p. 313 8). [Cf. p. 280,n. 6 above. TR.]
2 The nearest parallel would be Θεοσεβεῖς used as a proper name for the Hypsistarians (Schiirer, III.? p. 124).—But θεοσεβής has since turned up in a Jewish synagogue inscription of the 3rd cent. a.p. from Lydia, which mentions a benefactor Εὐστάθιος ὁ θεοσεβής (Keil and von Premerstein, Bericht tiber eine dritte Reise in Lydien, No. 42). The man was no doubt a proselyte.
3 Page 16,n. 7 above.
4 Abundant data in Schiirer, II. Ὁ. 45 f. [Eng. trs., Div. II., vol. 1, p. 32 f.].
5. Cf. the Jewish records of manumission, p. 321 ἔν above, and the prayers for vengeance at Rheneia, p. 413 ff. above.
ὁ Opera (ed. Mangey) 11. p. 467; cf. Schiirer, II.® p. 45 (Eng. trs., Div. IT., vol. I, p. 32].
APPENDIX IX
THE SO-CALLED “ PLANETARY INSCRIPTION "ΙΝ THE THEATRE AT MILETUS A LATE CHRISTIAN PROTECTIVE CHARM
In the north-west corner of the same theatre which has given us the new inscription described in Appendix VIII. there is on the outer wall an inscription which has long been known and which has often been discussed under the name of the “ planetary inscription ’’ of Miletus. I had been long acquainted with it from the Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum (No. 2895), and had no doubt met with it occasionally in commentaries on the New Testament, there quoted in proof of the worship of angels 1 in Asia Minor in the time of St. Paul (Colossians ii. 18). When it was shown to us in situ by Theodor Wiegand on 17 April, 1906, in the brilliant light of an Ionian sun, I immediately perceived a strong contrast between its real appearance and the picture left upon my memory by the Corpus of Inscriptions. There was quite a late look about the inscription, and its ‘“‘ mistakes’ in form reminded me of the early Byzantine papyri.
My impression was confirmed by Wiegand’s opinion of the style of the characters, and especially by his accurate reconstruction of the architectural history of the theatre.2. Wiegand’s opinion, shared also by Schiirer,? agrees with Cumont’s theory,‘ but stands
1 The late Christian character of the inscription once established, it follows that it can no longer be thus appealed to. Moreover, the “ worshipping of the angels ” of which St. Paul speaks is an ironical designation for strict Jewish piety, regulated by the law (which originated with the angels).
3 Cf. Sitzungsberichte der Kgl. Preuss. Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1904, p. 91. A fragment of the same text, agreeing with this, has been found meanwhile in another part of the theatre. It is, as Frickenhaus writes to me (letter, Miletus, 28 September, 1907) the left-hand upper corner of a block of grey marble; two mortise-holes to the left on top; greatest height 7} inches; greatest breadth 10} inches; greatest thickness 12} inches; greatest height of the letters 1 inch. The remaining letters of the inscription are the same as at the beginning of the great inscription: JEOYAI .(the last letter is no doubt the remains of an); beneath this come A and the remains ofan €; and, above, there is the same monogram as in the great inscription.
3 Zeitschrift fiir die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft, 6 (1905) p. 50.
4 Mélanges d’Archéologie et d’Histoire, 15 (1895) p. 273. See also Boll’s article “‘Hebdomas” in the Real-Encyclopddie of Pauly, Wissowa and
Kroll. 453
454 APPENDIX IX
in sharp contrast to the traditional view, according to which the text is either pagan or Judaeo-pagan.1 Rigid examination . of this important text, however, completely vindicates Wiegand’s judgment.
My readers are indebted to Wiegand for the good facsimile— the first, I believe, to be made from a photograph—here given in Figure 85. The dimensions? are as follows: present breadth 41 inches, height 24 inches, height of the largest letters 1 inch, height of the smallest letters 4 inch. The peculiar arrangement of the iriscription is clearly seen from the figure. It begins with a line consisting of symbols; originally no doubt there were seven, but they are now reduced to five. Then comes a line carved in large letters; it will be seen from the figure to what extent they are separated 8 :—
IEOYAHWIAWAIEOYAHWIWAEHOYIAWIHEOYENON [+ about 14 letters].
It consists, then, of a row of vowels, seemingly without recognisable principle of permutation,‘ but perhaps to be thus divided :—
Ieovanw Iawal Eovayun Ὠαεηουι Αωιήεου ἐν ὀν[όματιδ
+ about 9. letters],
or thus :—
Teovaywi AwA Ιεοναηωι, etc.
Under the row of vowels there were originally no doubt seven ovals, of which five and a half now remain. The outlines are rudely drawn and the spacing is irregular, but each oval is placed exactly below the foot of the corresponding symbol in the upper- most line. Each contains an inscription in smaller characters, and each inscription begins with the series of seven vowels arranged in exact alphabetical permutation (aeyovw, eqiovwa etc.), and ends with the prayer :—
1 Cf. for example Ernst Maass, Die Tagesgéttey in Rom und in den Provinzen, Berlin, 1902, p. 244 f.: “Τὸ is no doubt a compromise between Jewish and Hellenic ”’ (Ρ. 245).
2 Communicated to me by A. Frickenhaus (letter, Miletus, 28 September 1907).
8. The text of this line in the Corpus is very faulty, and moreover broken up nto single words in a misleading manner.
4 On such series of vowels in magic cf. Bibelstudien, Ὁ. 1 ff.; Bible Studies, p. 321 ff. No separation of this row of vowels into groups of seven is possible.
5 This restoration is not certain.
Early
the Theatre at Miletus. ion of Theodor Wiegand.
in
By permiss
Fic. 85.—Christian Archangel Inscription Byzantine Period.
APPENDIX ΙΧ 455
ἅγιε, O Holy One, φύλαξον 1 keep τὴν πόλιν the city Μιλησίων of the Milesians καὶ πάντας and all TOUS κατοι- that dwell therein. κοῦντας.
At the bottom of all is the following, again in the large lctters of the first line :—
᾿Αρχάγγελοι, φυλάσσεται 3 ἡ πόλις Μιλησίων καὶ πάντες of κατ[οικοῦντες.]
Archangels, keep the city of the Milesians and all that dwell therein.
Boeckh in the Corpus began his commentary with the remark that no doubt the inscription originally had seven compartments for the seven “ planets.” Since then the name “ planetary inscription’ has been regularly employed, although Boeckh’s assertion was a pure fetitio principii. And although Boeckh himself showed that the symbols placed over the compartments were by no means the stereotyped ones for the planets, the descriptions always say that the inscription begins with the
“planetary symbols.” In order to be sure on this point I submitted the symbols to the late Franz Boll, our best authority on ancient astrology, and received from him the assurance that they are not planetary symbols, or at least that up to that date he had never met with any certain example of their use as such.
In interpreting the inscription, therefore, we must not begin with the uncertainties—‘‘ planetary symbols ’’ which are really nothing of the kind; we must begin with the certainties, which are the word “ archangels "ὁ and the series of vowels. Are there any other cases known where the archangels occur in combination with series of vowels?
This question must be answered in the affirmative. Papyrus
1 This reading is certain; the Corpus gives an erroneous reading.
3.1.6. φυλάσσετε. The incorrect nominative which follows shows that the inscription is vulgar and not official.
8 Letter, Wiirzburg, 19 October, 1907. Out of the stores of his learning Boll provided me with abundant data relating to ancient symbols which I unfortunately cannot utilise here.—It seemed to me when I was in Galilee, in April 1909, that some of the ancient magical symbols are still in use among the modern Arab population as tattoo marks.
‘ Iam well aware that elsewhere the archangels are frequently brought into connexion with the planets by the ancients, but that is no reason for identifying archangels and planets without special grounds.
456 APPENDIX IX
No. 124 in the British Museum,! written in the 4th or 5th century A.D., gives a powerful formula consisting of four parallel columns, each containing seven magic names. In columns 1 and 3 the following series of vowels and names of archangels are found exactly corresponding with one another :—
I αεηιονω Μιχαὴλ
2 εηιουωα Ῥαφαηλ 3 ηιουωαε Γαβριηλ 4 vovwaen Σουριηλ 3 5. ουωαεῆι Ζαζιηλ
6 νωαεηιο Βαδακιηλ 8 7 waentov Συλιηλ
These series of vowels in the Egyptian papyrus are, however, down to the last letter, exactly the same as those carved in regular alphabetic succession on the marble at Miletus in the several (originally seven) compartments. On this account, and more especially since the bottom line of large letters expressly addresses the archangels, we must interpret the symbols over each of the seven compartments as symbols of the archangels. Since the names of the seven archangels vary ὁ and they do not always occur in a stereotyped order, we are not bound to assign the seven compartments of the Milesian inscription precisely to the seven angels mentioned in the papyrus. The only thing necessary is that in the symbols above the several compartments, which have been hitherto regarded as planetary symbols, we should look for monograms or tokens of the seven archangels. Experts in Byzan- tine monograms and masons’ ligatures will do well to take account also of the symbols and ligatures employed in astrological texts,®
1 Greek Papyri in the British Museum, ed. F. G. Kenyon (Vol. 1.), p. 123. After completing my manuscript I saw that Wiinsch, Antikes Zaubergerat aus Pergamon, p. 30, also compares this papyrus with the Milesian inscription.
2 This is perhaps equivalent to the stereotyped form Uriel. There are, however, other instances of Surtel. ;
3 This is of course a clerical error for Zadakiel (Zadakael, Zidktel), cf. W. Bousset, Die Religion des Judentums im neutestamentlichen Zeitaltey, Berlin, 1903, p. 319.
4 Cf. the literature referred to in Schirer’s article, p. 21.
5 Franz Boll, as hinted above, had great store of material at his command; ef. his hints in the Neue Jahrbiicher fir das klassische Altertum, 21 (1908) Pp. 121, 126; also the plates of facsimiles in Ios. Heeg, Hermetica, an offprint from the Catalogus codicum astrologorum Graecorum, VIII. 2, Bruxelles, 1911, and the references at p. 24.
APPENDIX IX 457
magical papyri,1 and Christian inscriptions? of other periods. We may in any case expect the most popular of the archangels, Michael, Raphael, and Gabriel; Michael, as the most powerful, would perhaps be in the middle,? Raphael and Gabriel perhaps at the beginning,‘ and in the fifth place perhaps (as in the papyrus) Zaziel or Zadakiel. The distribution of the single names is, however, for the present not at all certain, and remains of secondary importance.
Further confirmation, importing a new factor into the dis- cussion, is afforded by a Vienna magical papyrus of the 4th century A.D. published by Wessely.® It consists of two columns; in the left-hand column is the magic word αβλαναθαναλβα, written out so that the letters form a triangle with the apex downwards; ? in the right-hand column and at the bottom of the left column, a large number of angelic 8 and Divine names promiscuously. The end runs thus :—
Μιχαήλ, Αδηνι Οὐυσουρ, Michael, Adeni Usur, Γαβριήλ, Σουριήλ, Ῥαφαήλ, Gabriel, Suriel, Raphael, φύλαξον Yodia(sic) ἣν ἔτεκεν keep Sophia, whom
@ea[. . .?] ἀπὸ παντὸς... Thea(...?) bore, from all...
Here we have still more clearly the plan of the Milesian formula :
1 For example in Kenyon, pp. 90-122, there are a number of symbols, some of them resembling the Milesian ones; similarly in the magical papyri edited by Wessely and others.
* Some examples in the Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum, IV. pp. 395, 397.
* For the position of Michael in the middle cf. Bousset, Die Religion des Judentums, p. 319; and especially the Jewish identification of Michael with Mercury, over whose day, Wednesday (dies Mercurii), he is placed, U. F. Kopp, Palaeographia critica, 111., Mannhemii, 1829, p. 334 f.; W. Lueken, Michael, G6ttingen, 1898, p. 56.—Further, cf. James A. Montgomery, Aramaic Incanta- tion Texts from Nippur, Philadelphia, 1913, p. 96 ff. ᾿
4 The series of archangels begins thus.occasionally elsewhere, Ferd. Weber, Jiidische Theologie auf Grund des Talmud und verwandter Schriften,? p. 169. The first symbol in the Milesian inscription seems to contain a P, the second af. With the same serpentine ligature [ occurs as an abbreviation for part of a word in an inscription (Inscriptiones Graecae, IV. No. 205) on a similar subject quoted below, p. 459, n. 4.
5 There seems to be clearly a Z in the symbol.
6. Denkschriften der Kaiserl. Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien, Philos.-histor. Classe, vol. 42 (1893) p. 70 f.
7 Wessely says “‘ in the form of a wing”; that would be in the technical language of magic mrepvyoedds, which, however, surely indicates an arrangement of letters in this shape, q. The figure vy, which we have in the papyrus, is called βοτρυδόν, ‘‘ shaped liked a bunch of grapes ᾿᾿ (Testamentum Salomonis, ed. Fleck, p. 133; ed. McCown, Leipzig, 1922, p. 58*).
® In line 4 Wessely reads μελχιηα; it is certain to have been originally Μελχιηλ.
458 APPENDIX ΙΧ .
—(z) magic letters, (2) invocation of the archangels, (3) the prayer “keep...”
Those who attach importance to chance circumstances may insist on the incorrect nominative Σοφία, which corresponds to the incorrect nominative in the last line of the Milesian inscription.
Thus the inscription at Miletus would seem to be a prayer made more powerful by the use of magic symbols, and addressed to the seven archangels, for the preservation of the city and its. inhabi- tants. First of all the angels are indicated severally by their secret symbols; then follows a great line of adjuration applying to them collectively; and the compartments (originally seven in number) contain the adjuration, strengthened by the magic vowels, addressed to each of the Holy Ones in turn :
“Ὁ Holy One, keep the city of Miletus, and all that dwell therein.” Last of all comes the prayer to them collectively :— " Archangels, keep the city of Miletus, and all that dwell therein.”
The question whether this inscription is pagan, Jewish, or Christian has a different meaning, according as we are thinking of the contents, or of the men who had it carved on the wall of the theatre-at Miletus. The contents do not in the least point to paganism, and all the externals are against its having originated in pagan times. In itself the inscription might be Jewish: the archangels are Jewish, although not primitive Jewish, and in ancient Miletus, where we even encounter St. Paul at a solemn hour in his life,! there certainly were Jews.?
Moreover, as regards contents, the prayer has been influenced by the Septuagint? Yet the prominent position of the inscription and its repetition in another place make it very improbable that the text was set up by the doubtless small Jewish minority or even by a single Jew. What sounds Jewish in the contents of the prayer has long become Christian by inheritance and adoption. Prayer “ for the city ” particularly was an invariable concomitant of Christian worship in Anatolia even in early times,* and must
1 Acts xx. 15 ff.
3 Cf. the remarks above, p. 451 f., on the Jewish inscription in the theatre at Miletus.
3 Psalm cxxvi. [cxxvii.] 1, ἐὰν μὴ κύριος φυλάξῃ πόλιν, εἰς μάτην ἠγρύπνησεν ὁ φυλάσσων, “᾿ except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain.’ Again, πάντες of κατοικοῦντες is a common Septuagint formula, the fixity of which perhaps helped to occasion the error in the last line of the inscription.
The Greek Liturgies, ed. by C. A. Swainson, Cambridge, 1884, pp. 84, 92, IIo.
APPENDIX IX 459
therefore have been something quite familiar. Furthermore, the worship of the archangels, especially of Michael, was extremely popular in early Christian Asia Minor.1 Theodor Wiegand, the explorer of ancient Miletus, found some years ago between Didyma and Miletus an early Byzantine basilica, in which an inscription was discovered, built. into the mosaic of the narthex, and contain- ing an invocation of an archangel.? To this day throughout Greek Christendom innumerable evening prayers are uttered to the guardian angel: “ O holy angel of God, . . . keep me from every assault of the Adversary.”’ 3 In all probability, therefore, we have here before us a Christian memorial of the period when the theatre was converted into a citadel. Not indeed an official manifesto of the clergy of Miletus; they would surely not have employed magic symbols thus publicly. It is more likely to have been a private venture, perhaps the work of the guardsmen of the Christian stronghold that was built on the secure and massive foundation of the ancient masonry. The “prayer on the stone imploring the princes of the heavenly host to protect the city from all the dangers to which it was exposed in a ‘troublous age seemed to the faith of the soldiers more efficacious in the form of a protective charm. In the reign of Justinian an imperial official named Bictorinus caused two very similar prayers for protection to be carved on stone at Corinth or in the Isthmus, addressed to Christ and the Virgin Mary. There are no magic lines, but there are similar formulae and similar mistakes.4 These prayers seem to me to be an additional confirmation of the Christian nature of the Milesian inscription. They may even throw light on the exact date of its origin, which will no doubt be more closely determinable as the
1 Lueken, Michael, p. 73 ff.
* Sitzungsberichte, 1904, p. 89.
3 ἅγις "Ayyede τοῦ Oeod,. . . διαφύλαξόν pe ἀπὸ πάσης ἐπηρείας τοῦ ἀντικειμένου (Tepa ΣΖυνοψις καὶ τὰ ayia παθη μετα τῶν κυριακων ευαγγελιων εἐκδοσις vewrarn ὁμοία κατὰ πάντα πρὸς τὴν ἐγκεκριμένην ὑπὸ τοῦ Οἰκουμενικοῦ Πατριαρχείου τελευταίαν ἔκδοσιν, ev Αθηναις, 1094 sic [1904], p. 90).
.4 Inscriptiones Graecae, IV. No. 204 (discovered in the Isthmus, now lying in front of the Demarchy at New Corinth): ἱ Φῶς ἐκ φωτός, θεὸς ἀληθινὸς ἐκ θεοῦ ἀληθινοῦ, φυλάξῃ τὸν αὐτοκράτορα ᾿Ιουστινιανὸν καὶ τὸν πιστὸν αὐτοῦ δοῦλον Βικτωρῖνον ἅμα τοῖς οἰκοῦσειν (sic) ἐν ᾿Ελάδι (sic) τοὺς κατὰ θεὼν (sic) ζῶντας Τ, “+ Light of Light, very God of very God, keep the Emperor Justinian and his faithful slave Bictorinus, together with them that dwell in Hellas and godly livet.” Ibid., No. 205 (discovered at or near Corinth, now in the Museum at Verona) : t ‘Ay(ia) Μαρία, θεοτόκε, φύλαξον τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ φιλοχρίστου ᾿Ιουστινιανοῦ καὶ τὸν γνησίως δουλεύοντα αὐτῷ Βικτωρῖνον Τ σὺν τοῖς οἰκοῦσιν ἐν Κορίνθῳ κ(ατὰ) θεὼν (sic) t ζῶντας {, “1 Holy Mary, Mother of God, keep the kingdom of Justinian, the friend of Christ, and Bictorinus t, who served him truly, with them that dwell in Corinth and godly { live f.”
460 APPENDIX IX
study of laté inscriptions advances. The influence of the Christian liturgy on these Corinthian prayers is likewise unmistakable.t
1Cf. for example the Liturgy of St. Chrysostom (Swainson, p. 92), μνήσθητι, κύριε, τῆς πόλεως ἐν fi παροικοῦμεν καὶ πάσης πόλεως καὶ χώρας Kal τῶν πίστει κατοι- κούντων ἐν αὐταῖς, ‘‘ Remember, O Lord, the city in which we dwell and every city and district, and them that dwell in them in the faith.”
APPENDIX X
UNRECOGNISED BIBLICAL QUOTATIONS IN SYRIAN AND MESOPO- TAMIAN INSCRIPTIONS
(Reprinted with slight alterations from Philologus 64 [1905] pp. 475-478.)
In the Byzantinische Zeitschrift 14 (1905) pp. I-72, Baron Max von Oppenheim and Hans Lucas published “ Greek and Latin Inscriptions from Syria, Mesopotamia, and Asia Minor.””1 The majority of the Greek inscriptions are of Christian origin, and, as most of them are dated, they are particularly valuable, especially for the palaeography and textual history of the Greek Bible.? The importance of inscriptional evidence as to the text of the Bible in general has not yet been sufficiently recognised, but any- one familiar with the present position of the problems relating to the recensions by Lucianus and Hesychius will welcome every Greek Biblical quotation that can be certainly located and dated. The above-mentioned inscriptions contain a comparatively large number of Biblical references, and almost all of them can be located and dated. So far as they originate from places in Syria, they arouse our interest on account of the text of Lucianus, the sphere of whose influence is to be looked for especially in those regions. Hans Lucas, the editor of the inscriptions, of course recognised most of the quotations; in the following pages we shall only bring forward a few inscriptions in which he either failed to see, or perhaps intentionally left unnoticed, the Biblical quotations. I content myself with merely pointing them out, without address- ing myself'to the Lucianus problem or the general question of the relationships of the text. The numbers are those used by Lucas; the names denote the places where the inscriptions were found; the illustrations referred to far comparison are in Lucas.
No. 15. ‘Ali Kasiin, 394 A.D., πάντα ἐκ θεοῦ comes from 2 Corinthians v. 18.
1 Cf. also the notes by Mercati in the same volume of the Byzantinische Zeitschrift, p. 587, and by Clermont-Ganneau, ἐδία., 15 (1906) p. 279 ff., which did not come to my notice until after my article was printed.
3 Cf. p. 23 above.
ABI
462 ΑΡΡΕΝΡΙΧ Χ
No. 21. Tamak, 559 Α.Ρ., thus read and transcribed by Lucas :—
JONWCEIMPO ee ee ee ee ἸΝΧΕΡΟΥΒΕΙ τῶ]ν χερουβεί[μ], is a quotation from LXX Psalm Ixxix. [Ixxx.] 2 :—
[ὁ ποιμαίνων τὸν Ἰηλ πρόσχες, ὁ ὁδηγ]ῶν ὡσεὶ πρό- [Bara τὸν Ἰωσήφ ὁ καθήμενος ἐπὶ τῶ]ν χερουβεὶμ] [ἐμφάνηθι.......
No. 23. Kasr Νανᾷᾶ, undated, facsimile figure 4, is thus read and transcribed by Lucas :—
Τ᾿ ΛΉΓΙΟ ? π]λησίο- ] TION vo... .}reov JWPAIAWC . oe + + ὡραία ὡς ]PrOCAAA . «4 « Ίργος 8a8- JIKAAHKAI . oe ee καλὴ καὶ ]NCOI Ἷ νον νον ἢν σοι The editor remarks: ‘‘ The contents were probably of a religious
nature, but my attempts at restoration have not succeeded. One. is much reminded of the Song of Solomon, cf. vi. 3; Καλὴ εἶ πλησίον pov, ὡς εὐδοκία, ὡραία ds ᾿Ιερουσαλήμ (cf. also verses 5, 6). Von Wilamowitz reminds me that AAA in line 4 might signify Aafeié.” It is a. pity that this right clue was not followed up. The inscription is in fact made up of words taken from the Song of Solomon, viz. from chapter iv.; but only a selection, not the full text, is given. This makes it much more difficult to reconstruct the lines correctly. The following restoration on the basis of LXX Song of Solomon iv. 1, 3, 4, 7, makes no claim to have recovered the original arrangement of the lines; it merely tries to hinge the endings of the lines together :—
I) ἰδοὺ εἶ καλὴ ἡ π]λησίο[ν
ny a μου. ὀφθαλμοί σου περιστεραί, ὡς σπαρ]τίον
μι ραί, (3 ρ [τὸ κόκκινον χείλη σου, καὶ 7 λαλιά σου] ὡραία. ὡς [λέπυρον τῆς ῥόας μῆλόν σου" ὡς πύ]ργος Δαδ
ἧς ῥόας μῆλέ 4 py [τράχηλός cov. (7) ὅλη, ἡ πλησίον pov, εἼΐ καλὴ καὶ μῶμος οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν σοί. t
With regard to AAA = Aaved it is to be noted that the mark of abbreviation seems to be recognisable in the facsimile,
APPENDIX Χ 463
No. 24. Kasr Νανᾷᾶ, undated, facsimile figure 5, is read and transcribed by Lucas :—
Ἷ EICEAC| Εἰσελεύσ. 2 2. eee ἐξο- ΜΟΛΟΓΕΪ μολογήϊ[σ . ..
€=OMO[ eEouolAoy . ..
MAAYT[ μα αὐτί...
It is added that “‘ the contents are at all events of a religious nature’; the editor is reminded of passages such as LXX Psalm ΧΙ]. [xliii.] 4 and Revelation iii. 5. The inscription is, however, .a quotation from LXX Psalm xcix. (c.) 4 :—
Εἰσέλθ[ατε εἰς τὰς πύλας αὐτοῦ ἐν ééo-] , ν᾿ “»λ > nx» κ« Z μολογή[σει, τὰς αὐλὰς αὐτοῦ ἐν ὕμνοις "] ἐξομο[λογεῖσθε αὐτῷ, αἰνεῖτε τὸ dvo-] Y pa adz[od*
It is very improbable that there was «is before rus in line 2 (as there is in Codices 8 A R T etc.).
No. 25. Kasr Nawd, undated, is read, transcribed, and trans- lated by Lucas :—
Vip, ACYMOYKPC[ -. σύ pov, K(¥)p(vo)s, . . Thou to me, O Lord,
JMOYTIAHCIC/,,,[ ... μου πλησίο[ν] .... to me art near, JIHK €®AAHM[ .. . ἡ κεφαλή plov] ... my head 1 ommoyy [ ot μου ψ[υχῆς 9] alas, my soul (9)
The inscription is, however, again a quotation from the Song of Solomon,! LXX v. 2 :—
[φωνὴ ἀδελφι]δοῦ pov κρού[ει ἐπὶ τὴν θύραν. avor-] Edv μοι ἀδελφή] μου, πλησίον μου, περιστερά pov,] [τελεία μον. ὅτ]ι ἡ κεφαλή plov ἐπλήσθη δρόσου] [καὶ οἱ βόστρυχ]οί μον ψ[εκάδων νυκτός.] ᾿ ᾿
No. 39. Kasr el Beriidj, undated, ᾿Εμανονὴλ μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν ὁ θε[ό]ς.. Cf. Matthew i. 23. For the spelling Ἐμανονήλ see Onomastica. Sacra, ed. Lagarde,? 4930 Cod. F.
No. 49. Kasr ibn Wardan, 564 A.D., πάντα εἰς δόξαν θ(εο)ῦ. Quotation from 1 Corinthians x. 31.
No. 99. Diarbekr, 437 (?) A.D., ὧ[ν] τὰ dvdu(ata) ἐν β(() β(λῳ)
1 Probably an inscription for a door, with a religious application; the words
of the Song of Solomon were probably connected with Rev. iii. 20 and inter- preted allegorically of Christ,
464 APPENDIX Χ
[this, and not βιβλίῳ, would be the proper extension] -fu(js). Quotation from Philippians iv. 3.
Apart from their importance as witnesses to the text, Biblical quotations in inscriptions are always full of interest for the history of devotion. They show what books of Holy Scripture were the favourites, and what were the really popular texts. Not infre- quently they enable us to see how they were interpreted. But none of this has yet been worked out; people still prefer to cite the Biblical quotations in the Fathers from bad editions of their ‘works. Let us hope that in the Corpus of Christian Inscriptions? to. which we look forward the Biblical material will be treated in a manner satisfactory alike to the demands of epigraphy. and of modern Biblical philology.
1 A beginning has been made by Henri Grégoire, Recueil des inscriptions
Brecques chrétiennes d’Asie Mineure, Paris, 1922 ff. Cf. also Diehl’s Inscrip- tiones Latinae Christianae Veteres, p. 23, n. 3 above.
APPENDIX XI KAUTSKY’S “‘ ORIGIN OF CHRISTIANITY ”’
STARTING from the doubtless correct premise that practical association with modern movements within the lower classes deepens our insight into the movements of the common people in antiquity, Kautsky feels that he is qualified to investigate by historical methods the problem of the origin of Christianity. In doing so he is returning to an old love. Christianity was “in its beginnings undoubtedly a movement among unpropertied classes of the most varied type ’—he lays this down at once in his preface, and here for the present I could agree with him, even though I might feel obliged to insert a qualifying “ on the whole.” From the obvious danger that a practical politician, in taking up the pen of the historian, might be inclined to model the past on the pattern of the present, or according to present-day needs, Kautsky thinks that he is protected by the materialistic method of his research.
Here already doubt arises whether a “‘ method ” so vigorously cried up at the beginning really is a protection, or whether it does not constitute a hindrance. But let us leave methodological controversies alone; they are always a sign of uncertainty. The great historians make no long speeches about the method of, their work: they work. He who, having a method, does violence to the sources, must be rejected, and his method with him, be it even the method of the angels. He who with no pre- tentious methods, but with keen eye and sure hand, extracts all that is possible from the sources—he will conjure up the spirits of the past.
In the question of sources Kautsky’s method seems to me to have deserted him. He argues against the “ traditional concep- tion’ of Christianity as the creation of one man, Jesus Christ. Against this conception he first urges the well-known fact that the profane historians of the early Roman Empire scarcely mention the founder of Christianity. But this non-mention is the direct
1 Karl Kautsky, Der Ursprung des Christentums. Eine historische Unter- suchung. Stuttgart, 1908. Pp. xvi, 500.—This review is reprinted from ** Die Hilfe "15 (1909) p. 123; cf. p. 395, n. 2 above.
Light from Ancient East. 465 HH.
466 APPENDIX ΧΙ :
result of the specifically non-literary nature of. Primitive Chris- tianity—a movement among the weary and heavy-laden, men without power or position, ‘‘ babes,’’ as Jesus Himself calls them, the poor, the base, the foolish, as St. Paul with a prophet’s sym- pathy describes them. Kautsky himself knows the passage. The profane historians of the world contemporary with Primitive Christianity were thoroughly aristocratic spirits, representatives of the thin educated stratum, looking down and not up at the world. The insignificant, despised movement that followed the appearance of Jesus, the unknown Galilean, could not attract the attention of these historians of state affairs, nor, if it had attracted their attention; could it have seemed interesting to them.
If, therefore, the knowledge that the earliest Christianity was in the main a movement of the lower orders be taken seriously, Gibbon’s mockery, which Kautsky makes his own, becomes altogether groundless.
Moreover, the Christian sources of the primitive period are judged by Kautsky, not from the level of his own fundamental conception, but from that of a sated Berlin rationalism which looks. down genteelly and unhistorically upon the “ ignorance ”’ of the evangelists and their mania for miracles. Many passages in the book read as if written, not by one who knows the lower classes and their simple-heartedness, their enthusiasm, their delight in the massive, the crude, and the palpable, but by some pale anaemic representative of the bourgeois press, in whom the rude strength and native vigour that a labour leader should possess have been shrivelled by the atmosphere of the modern city. If Primitive Christianity is a movement of the lower orders, how could its literary relics be other than they are? We have learnt just lately to look on them as books of the people; their lack of literary affectation, their unconcern for doctrinaire reflectfon and artificial refinement are too obvious. To the man who really thinks historically, these birthmarks of the gospels are marks of genuineness; and the whole apparatus of miracles is but the frame, inevitable in antiquity, for the portrait that those simple narrators, sprung from the people, are sketching, the portrait of Jesus. This portrait is seen to be historically genuine when one has learnt to look upon picture and frame as things distinct. It is the simple souls that are capable, better perhaps than the sophisticated historians, of seizing upon the characteristic features of a leading personality. ᾿
Kautsky’s attitude towards the second great stratum of Primi- tive Christian documents, the letters of St. Paul, is also incom- prehensible on his own premises. From his point of view he ought to have regarded these letters as fiery pamphlets in the agitation
APPENDIX XI 467
conducted by an enthusiastic leader of the proletariat. Actually he saddles himself with the opinions of certain curious critics, who, mistaking the volcanic nature of the letters, treat and mal- treat the tentmaker of Tarsus as if he were a Professor of Dog- matics, and proceed with their scissors to carve out the genuine Paulinism from the false.
Kautsky fails as an investigator of sources at yet another point. His main thesis, that the origin of Christianity is to be accounted for materialistically, is founded on a detailed description of the state of society under the Roman Empire. I have no desire—it would not be reasonable—that he should join the specialists and himself become a professional historian. But even though he takes his information at second and third hand, he ought never- theless to have a look round the vast field of research that has been opened up by modern epigraphy and papyrology. His picture of Roman society is in my opinion out of date, because it is essen- tially based upon the literary evidence. Such evidence does not take us very far into the strata of society where the origins of Christianity lie. Thanks to the newly discovered evidence con- cerning the men of the Hellenistic East, as recorded by themselves, we are now in an altogether different position for studying their moods and feelings; and I do not find that Kautsky’s picture becomes any more credible in the light of these documents.
The chief point of disagreement between Kautsky and myself lies in our fundamental judgment of the Primitive Christian movement. He sees in it a movement for the emancipation of the proletariat, accompanied by a tendency to communism; and thus he underrates quite considerably the effects of the creative personality of Jesus and of St. Paul. The longer I work at these subjects, the more strongly do I realise the popular religious enthusiasm of Primitive Christianity; and it would all be unin- telligible to me without Jesus as its power-centre—Jesus, whose inmost life goes on thrilling and pulsating in Paul and all the others. What Kautsky saw by instinct, namely the connexion of Primitive Christianity with the ranks of the people—that is correct. But what he calls an historical inquiry, what he calls a materialistic explanation of the origin of Christianity, is an interesting attempt at construction, but remains after all—construction.
INDICES
(The references ave to pages and footnotes.
E.g., 269, = p. 269, ἢ. 1; and
2699 = the portion of note which has overlapped from p. 268)
I.—PLACES.
ABERDEEN, Vii, 139
Abila, 51, 3534
Abilene, 5;
Abyssinia, 3355
Acraephiae, 3544) 3712
a me 281,, 282, 286, 329,
ἂς ρον (Athens), 286 Actium-Nicopolis, 373 -Adramyttium, 348, Aegean, 20 Aegina, 286, 413, Aegira, 273, Aeolia, 17, -Aetolia, 321, ες Aezani, 376, Afghanistan, 144 Afium-Kara-Hissar, xiii Africa, 25, 66; Province of, 362, ΑΚΒταῖπι, 42., 433 ς΄. cg Ala-shehr (Philadelphia), xiii, 244, 311, 374 Alexandretta, xiii Alexandria, xiii, 28, 56,, 163,, 167 ff., 1804, 182, 184,, 201 ff., 206-213, 3245, 442 ff advent-coin, 3715 Alexandrian O.T., 48, 423 Biblical lexicography begins, 405 bishop and clergy, 452, 206-213 god of the city, 3454, 3652 graffito, 303, inscription, 352 Jews at, 459, 1204, 423, 452 papyri written at, 84, 152 ff., 1925, 19319, 195 ‘Ali Kasiin, 461 Amalfi, 235, Amorgus, 1178 Amphissa, 3215 Anapo, river, 28 Anathoth, 34 Anatolia, xiii, 14,, 380, 458 Ancyra, 282,, 3745 Andros, 1391, 1425, 143 Angora, xiii. See Ancyra. Anticythera, 293 Antigonea, 341;
167,
Antinoé, 382, 36449
Antioch in Pisidia, 5,, 435 ff., 436,
Antioch on the Orontes, xiii, 1, 65, 48» 785, 86, 90, 41, 95, 281g, 2827, 3452, 392
Antipatris, 255
Antiphellus (Lycia), 90,;
Apamea, ΟῚ
Aphrodisias, 3575
Aphrodite, village in Egypt, 3705,
372 Pie (Arabah), valley, 14, Arabia, 14,4, 136, 138 Aradus, 2538. 3441 Arcadia, 372 Areopagus, 384, 387-390 Arethusa, Fountain of, 28 Arles, 221 Armenia, 153, 363. Arsinoé ({τοροά!ο 0115); 31, 92, 190, 2685, 36419 Arsinoite nome, 18723, 190, 205, 207, 20949, 210 ff. See Fayim. Ashmunén (Eshmunein), ft 305 Asia, Province of, 237, 2784, 300, 344, 3491) 379, 3715, 437, 451 Asia Minor, xiii, xvi, 4371 archaeology and inscriptions, 5, 6, 13-19, 221, 3, 6, 8, 3034, 328, 374, 461, 4644 cult of archangels, 459 culture and civilisation, 275, 278, 280 ff., 286, 287. difficulties of travel in, 279 influences St. Paul, 308 f., 335
Kowy, 89 ff., 104, τοῦ f.
languages, 651
south-west, 171, 9010, 114, 115, 3122
special words: διατάσσεσθαι, 909; πάπας, 2192; , κυριακός, 357; Sebaste Day, 359, 360f.;
παρουσία, 370 western, 144, 348, Aspendus, 152, 154, 155 Assiout, 445 Assuan. See Syene. Assur, 523
46a
470
Athens, the Acropolis, 286 antiquities preserved there, 52,, 563, 286, 2932, 413 ff., 422 + author’s visit, 563, 245,, 2814, 414 Hadrian at, 372 inscriptions, 859,971, 376, . oldest Greek letter found there, 150 ostraca at, 52 publications, 2451, 4032, 404, St. Paul at, 99, 254, 384, 387-390 Attica, 955, 130, 150;, 287, 303,, 3047, 305, 3671, 3726 Austria, 230,, 442,. See Vienna. Avroman, 32; 36
Baalbec, xiii
Baden, 1243
Baetocaece, 101
Baiseira, 33
Baithabarta, 33
Bale, 311, 40, 2052
Balik-laou (Balyklagho), 2804 Beersheba, 36
Behnesa. See Oxyrhynchus. Berenice (Cyrenaica), 115, Berenice, Port of, 154, 1551 Berlin, xi, xvii, xix, 354
Academy, 123, 13¢, 375, 137
Botanical Gardens, 26,, 29
inscriptions, 106, 3121, 3152, 341, 3455, 3462, 3471) 5, 30015, 366
Museum, glass goblets, 130
Museum, lead tablet, 95, 150
Museum, oldest Greek letter, 150
Museum, papyri, 28, 373, 43f., 170 ff., 179 ff., 184 ff., 187 ff.
Museum, parchments, 45,
Museum, publications, 135-5
names and tombstones, 279,
New Testament Seminar, ostraca, 5τι; Ppapyri, 46,, 1844, 186,, 3950
ostraca, 54, 105
papyri (‘ Berliner Griechische Ur- kunden’’), 40, 54, 741 845, 85, 865, 7» 89, 94, TI75, IIQs, 6» 1350, 1729, 185,0, 186,, 1977, 2117, 2342) 2354) 2693, 2705, 298,, 3245, 3315) 3344) 3413, 3423
Prussian State Library, papyrus, 367
Reichspost Museum, xvii, 170
Beroea, 437
Bethel (Bielefeld), 51
Bethlehem, xiii, 271,
Beyrout, xiii
Bielefeld, 51
Bingerbriick, 74
Birmingham, 313, 129,
Birseba, 36
Bithynia, 87, 3156, 3715, 3786
Black Sea, 152, 3, 88, 300, 310, 315. See Latyschev in Index V.
Bocotia, 2819, 354
Bonn, 262, 378,
INDEX
Bosporan kingdom, 363, Braunsberg, xi, 328), 420,
Bremen, 116, 394,
Breslau, 265
Britain, 12, 448); ancient, 300, 371,
4473 | Bubastis, 138, Bubon, 312, Bucharest, xvi, 413 ff., 422 Buda-Pesth, xvi Bulgaria, 376, Bushey, 3133 Byzantium, 378.4, 456
Caesarea, 753, 237, 279, 3452 Cairo, xi, xili, xvi, 40, 423, 505; 152, 162, 4275, 430 ff. Calymna, 4453 Cambridge, xi, xvi, I, 172 edition of LKX, 424, 437 Cambridge, Mass., U.S.A., [240 (Fig. 46)] Cambridgeshire, 225, Campania, 275 Candia, 280, Capernaum, xiii Cappadocia, 192 ff. Caranis, 187 ff., 268, Caria, 171, 116g, 3630, 370ς, 37511 Carmel, xiii Carpathus, 81 Carthage, 3563 Cerceosiris, 369 Cerigo, 293, _ Cerigotto, 2932 Ceryza, 328, Chaeronia, 321g Chaidari, near Athens, 150 Chalia, 321 Chersonese, Tauric, 362, Chicago, 40 Chile, 254 Chinili Kiosk, 80, Cibyratis, 17, Cilicia, 174, 91, 975, 115 Cnidus, 153 f., 156 ff Coblentz, 408, Coelesyria, 153» Cologne, 3513, 3785 Colossae, 237, 279, 335 Congo, 29, Constantinople, xiii, xvi, 80 Corinth, 1, 300, 4371 advent coin, 371 archaeology and inscriptions, 19,,
4591. Christian church at, 301 ff., 328 f., 361 Gulf of, 287 the Macellum at, 276 Nero at, 354, 371 St. Paul at, 240, 276, 279, 392, 437 St. Paul's letters to, 21,, 107, 236f., 239, 246, 279, 301 ff., 329, 351, 361, 391
193, 276,
INDEX
Corinth, situation of, 281,, 286, 391 synagogue inscription, 8, 4511. Coronia, 3214 ΟΟ5,145,19,115,2535, 280,,294,,294., 3214) 327ς, 330ς, 3455, 3711, 3722» 3774 Cremona, 131, Crete, 98, 1009, 107, 2794, 2801, 293, , 423 Crimea, 129, Crocodiles, City of, 31 Cyclades, 393 Cyprus, 235, 1594 Cyrenaica, 115, Cysis, 213 f.
16,
΄
Dakkeh, 514, 117, 3524
Damascus, xiii, 14,, 282, 382
Daulis, 84,, 321
Dead Sea, xiii
Delos, 15,, 61,, 156,, 2803, 286,
413 ff., 4221. ἢ Delphi, 5,, 13, 14, 82, 873, 111, 227)», 286, 311,, 320 ff., 322 f.
Derbe, 437
Dessau, 7;
Detroit, 42,
Diarbekr, 463
Didlington Hall, Norfolk, 205
Didyma, 14ς, 2792, 282,, 286, 348,, ᾿ 3718, 459
Dill, river, 112,
Dionysias (Fayim), 216 ff.
Dniester, 376,
Dora, 715
‘Dorylaeum, 376,
Dublin, 40,
Ebedjik, 312, Eden, 260, Edinburgh, xi Egypt, xiii, 6, 138, census papers, 69 Christianity in, 218 ff., 224 diptych from, 442-6 Goths in, 38, hellenised, 9,, 66, 275, inscriptions, 1385, 176, 270, 34524, 358, 361, 4034, 4355 _ Kowy, 83, 86, 104 ff. lena! docaments: 34, 335 Lower, xiii Middle, 31 ostraca, 50-60, 105, I10f., 200, 204, 221, 224, 398, 403, Pagan piety in, 155-161, 284 f. papyrus and papyri in and from, 21-32, 36-50, 255-263, 398, 4034, 405 f., 425-429, 430-434 papyrus letters, 149, 152, 162, 164, 167, 170, 172, 174, 176, 179, 184, 187, 192, 197, 201, 205, 213, 215, 216, 234 f., 296-299, 367
211ff., 213 ff.,
166,
471
Egypt, soul-types, 296-299 special words: κύριος, κυριακός, 350-358; Sebaste Day, 358 ff.; σωσικόσμιος, 364 f.; παρουσία, 368 ff., 372; Καίσαρος, 377. topography of, 45, 173 f. Upper, 31, 429, 451, 57, etc. village life, 267 f. wooden tablets, 99 f., 124, See also Index IV. Elatia, 3214 Elephantine, 31, 371, 2, 524, 1759 Eleusis, 286, 372 El-Fayam. See Fayim. El-Hibeh. See Hibeh. El-Khargeh, 358 Ephesus, xiii, xv, 1, 282, 286, 300 archaeology and inscriptions, 13,, 92, 112 f., 141, 269,, 2815, 309, 344) 3751 Isis cult, 141, St. Paul at, 160, 237,, 246, 254, 279, 2815, 329, 392 St. Paul’s letter to, 234 ff., 3134, . 4371 4384 in the Revelation, 244, 348, 374 Ruphus of, 89 sculpture from, 293 theatre of, 113, 281,, 309 Epidaurus, 16,, 136, 280,, 286, 303,, 37% Eregli, 359, 36 Erfurt, 265 Erythrae, 12049 Eshmunein. See Ashmunén. Eski Shehr, xiii Euboea, 234, 96, 3654 Euhemeria, (Kasr-el-Banat), 134,, 298, fuphrates, 12, 36
Fayim, 189 diptych from, 442-446 inscriptions from, 2693, 345, 361 papyri from, 31f., 43, 47, 741, 81, 86, 907, 94, 1344, 7, 152, 162, 170, 179, 183 f., 187, 188,,, 189), 205, 216, 219, 2342, 2984, 331, 3365, 341, 3675 Florence, 40, 190,, 269 f., 333 f.. France, 442, Frankfort on the Main, xvi Freiburg im Breisgau (Germany), 40
Galatia, inscription from, 219,; πάπας, 3045; St. Paul’s letter to, 237, 246, 361
Galilee, xiii, 1,.64, 252, 392, 4553
Geneva, 40, 218, 271
Germany, Roman, 74, 300
Giessen, 382, 40, 18915, 218,
Gomorrah, 262,
Gorgippia, 321
Gorlitz, 381
Graz, 62,
472
Greece, xvi, 6, 1323, 275, 352, 368, , 4042 ; Grimsby, 400,
Bee ee ay 233, 26345, 3331 4184,
Hatit κε ‘Audsha, 36 Hagios Elias (monastery in Thera), XV, 280, Haifa, xiii Halicarnassus, 96;, 232, 3035, 3445 Halle, 515 Hamburg, 40, 462, 823, 1891, 36412 Harvard University, 240, Hauran, 23, 90 f. Heidelberg, xvii, 1, 274, 542, 1249, 2319, 2321, 2991, 4034, 406 (Fig. 74) Botanical Gardens, 26, ostraca, 541 PapyTi, 30, 373, 4, 40, 442, 59, 21019, 215, 2361, 2 γ» 25910 2984, 3344) 5» 405 parchments, 59 Heraclia on the Black Sea, 2954
3157 Herborn, 127,, 237;, 406 f. _ Herculaneum, 753, 117 f., 118, “Hermonthis, 31, 221 f., 224 Hermopolis or Hermupolis Magna, 835, 5» 1901, 218, 236,, 2685 Hermupolis, village, 216 ff., 234 Hermupolis Parva, 218 Hibch, 40, 87, 111, 164, 208, Hierapolis, xiii, 14), 909, 278,, 2823, 2 Hierapytna, 106 Hileh, lake, 25,
οι, 96,,
Tasus, 361,
Ibedshik, 312, ΓῚ
Iconium, 6). See Konieh. Ida, Mount, 280, Illyricum, 276,
Tonia, 311,
Ios, 135 ff., 142, 288, Irbid, 90
Ireland, 128,
Islands, xvi, 14, 20, 279 f.
See also Aegean, Aegina, Amorgus, Andros, Anticythera, Calymna, Carpathus, Cos, Crete, Cyprus, Delos, Iasus, Ios, Myconos, Mytilene, Paros, Rhencia, Rhodes, Salamis, Samos, Sicily, Syme, Thera.
Isthmus of Corinth, 459,
Istropolis, 85
Italy, 753, 2003, 211, 275, 297, 354, 3715
Southern, xvi, 275. See also Cam-
ania, Florence, Herculaneum,
isenum, Naples, Pompeii, Rome, Tiber, Turin, Venice, Verona.
Itanus, 106
INDEX
Jaffa, xiii
Jéme, 221
Jena, 434, 5, 483
Jericho, xili, 343, 1347
Jerusalem, xiii f., 1, 36,, 80, 1025, 1347, 1539» 160, 248,, 258, 26245, 2031, 276, 3551. 419, 436, 439 ff., 442 ff., 462
Jordan, xiii, 256, 262
Judaea, xiii, 1, 4454, 4463
Karlsruhe, 124,
Kasr el-Banat. See Euhemeria.
Kasr el Beriidj, 463
Kasr ibn Wardan, 463
Kasr Naw4, 462 f.
Kefr Hauar, 109, 350,
Keures, 328,
Kigali, 25,
Kitega, 25
Konieh, Xili, 359, 2825
Kopanis, village in Parthia, 33 ff.
Kores, 328,
Koula, 328,
Kreuznach, 74
Kuh-i-Sélan, one of the Avroman Mountains, 32
Kurdistan, 32, 3635
Lahn, river, 1123, 408, Laodicea, xiii, 237, 244, 282,, 348),
374 Lebanon, 266 Leipzig, 31, 29, 40, 783, 91g, 100, Leontopolis, 449, Letopolis, 31 Levant, 1 Leyden, 54, 1246, 137g, 3014 Libya, 174 Lille, 235, London, xi, xvii British Museum, 56. Egypt Exploration Fund, ostraca, 505, 221, 224; papyri, 164,, 167,,
, 4728, 1971 inscriptions in-B.M., 13, 2, 19, 80,, 922, 967, 1118, 141}, 3092, 5»
344:
ostraca in B.M., 54
papyriin B.M., 30, 373, 40, 463, 83>, 935 1373, 142}, 174, 192, 213, 2144, 216, 218, 2214, 2357, 2707, ae 306, 3344 3365, 3484, 3771
parchments in B.M., 32 S.P.C.K. “ revised Wettstein,” 3, the late F. Hilton Price’s collection, fo) igen, 2804 Lycia, 171, 904}, 104,, 113f., 294, (3129, 338, Lydia, 141, 171, 1925, 2251, 3113, 328), 2
45 Lystra, 280¢, 2810
INDEX
Macedonia, 14,4, 300, 3715, 436
Maeander, 279,. See Magnesia.
Magdola, 268,.
Magnesia on the Maeander, 134, 20%, 106 f., 2784, 3461, 3473, 3639, 3739
Manchester, 20., 46,
Mantinea, 341,
Marburg, 3, 346,
Margate, 442,
Mars’ Hill, 387
Mauretania, 371,
Medinet el-Fayim, 31
ce enean world, 55, 65f., 79, 304
Megara, 563, 57a, 95, 144
Melbourne, 320,
Memnonia, the (=Jéme), Thebes, 221
Memphis, 31
Menas, shrine in Egypt, 56,
Menuthis, 76, Ι
Merom, waters of, 253
Mersina, xiii
Mesopotamia, 144, 233, 461 ff.
Methymna, 4453
Miletopolis, 31T,
Miletus, 139, 157, 1146, 121, 282), 286, 328,, 348;, 3746 451f,, 453 ff.
Milyas, 17,
Misenum, 179 ff.
Moesia, 3715
Monodendri, cape, 134
Milheim (near Cologne), 381
Munich, 40, 3524, 404,
Minster, 51,
Myconos, 15,
Myra (Lycia), 1145
Mytilene, 99,
Nahr el-Falik, 25,
Nahr el-Kelb, 159
Naples, 28, 753, 1799, 276, 354 Nassau, 406
Naupactus, 321, 3245
Nazareth, xiii, 8, 64, 73, 245, 291, _ 380, 383
New Corinth, 459,
New Haven, Conn., U.S.A., [176] New York, 40,
Nicaea (Bithynia), 87,, 3252
Nile, 12, 27, 29,, 174, 207
Nippur, 457s
Norfolk, 205, 225,
Notion, 321,
Nubia, 234, 50, 514, 1176, 352s Numidia, 356, ;
Nysa (“‘ Arabia”), 137 £., 138, 142 Nysa (Caria), 3706, 37511
Oasis, Great, 46, 213 ff., 2144, 228, _ 2702, 358
Oenoanda, 9049
Ogowe, 25,
Olbia, 883, 152, 310, 3703, 378,
473
Olney, 388, Olympia, 13, 286, 3445 Orchomenus, 1119 Oxford, 41,, 197, 201 f., 2354, 430 Oxyrhynchus (Behnesa), 203.4, 268 bishop of, 223 Logia from, 30, 413, 425-429 nome of, 164,, 173 ,other apocrypha, 41,4, 5 papyri from, 32, 40, 452 46 4911 753 817, 834, 85, 86, 90, 931, 116, II7, 1105, 123, 134, 135, 141, 167, 172, 176, 1772, 188), 197, 201, 2044, 208), 2143, 21744, 239 288,, 308,, 3217, 3279, 3342 345u 4, 3518, 3533 7 Biblical papyri, 30, 42, 230 f.
Palestine, xiiif., 6, 6,, 144, 146, 253 36, 162, 253, 268 £., 2751, 353, 355
Palmyra, 81, 3633, 4473
Pamphylia, 17;, 155
Panagia Kapuli, 281,
Panopolis, 31, 429
Panticapaeum, 1029, 5, 321,8, 3271
3786 Paris, Academy, 151 Great Magical Papyrus, 85, 254-- 264, 3024, 418 Mandaean inscription, 305 ostraca, 54 papyri, 40, 83, 134 Société des Etudes Juives, xi, 440 Parnassus, 321, 329 Paros, 266, 3153, 3703 Patras, 3713 Pergamum, xv, 244, 286, 374 archaeology and inscriptions, 13,, 20, 87, 90, QI, 1977, 264,, 278, 2815, 312, 315, 3331 3441, 3462, 3471 3486, 7 3491, 360f.,. 362,, 3758 Persia, 144, 354, 363, 3757 378: Petersburg, St., 644, 152, Petra, 146 Petrograd, 152, Phaedriads, 286 Philadelphia (Fayim), 152, 179 ff., 186, 189,, 442 ff. Philadelphia (Lydia), xiii, 244, 311, 374 Philae, 350,, 352, 368, Philippi, 237 f., 3313 Phmau, 200, Phoenicia, 74, 1539, 2535: 3441 Phrygia, 192, 3715, 376 9 Phthochis, 173 Physcus, 321, Pisidia, 69, 171, 223, 3155 Plainfield, New Jersey, U.S.A., 131, Plétzensee, xix Polydeucia, 134 Pompeii, 117, 276 f., 37619 Pompeiopolis, xiii Pontus, 153, 370
162,
474
Port Said, xiii
Prague, 36,
Priene, 135, 205, 86, 1062, 1155, 12049, 2784, 2953, 3103
oe inscription, 3453, 3477
3
Prusias on the Hypius, 3155, 3789
Pselkis. See Dakkeh.
Ptolemais (Acre), 2535
Qau-el-Kebir, 44,
Rakhlé, 84, Red Sea, 257 and 262 (1. 3054) Rheneia, 15;, 233, 1162, 3222, 413-424, _ 4525 Rhine, 12, 744, 3785 Rhodes, 23, Rhodiapolis, 171, 104}, 2943 Rome, 448, 1 Cor. known at, 391 Hadrian at, 371 inscriptions, 16,, 914, 135, 2791 313, 3423, 371, 4353 Jewish inscriptions οὗ Monteverde,
185, 4402, 447-450 Jews at, 66 ‘lord ” emperor, 351
oldest (?) Christian -papyrus letter written at, 47, 205-213
ostraca, 54
St. Paul at, 237, 238, 392
St. Paul’s letter to, 91, 235, 239 f.,
279
Tiridates at, 354 Rosetta, 3452, 3525 Ruhleben, xix Russia, 233, 64,. See Black Sea. Saba, 266 St. Petersburg, 644, 152, Sais, 1749 Salamis, 286 Salihiyeh, on the Euphrates, 36 Samaria, xiii, 52, Samos, 1025 Santiago de Chile, 25, Sardis, xiii, 155, 903, 91,
3746 3754
Scaptopare, 376, Scili (Scilli, Numidia), 2525, 356 Scotland, 46, Sedasa, 2805, 3527 Seeland, 12, Selinus, river, 315 (Fig 58) Serapeum 83, Sicily, 25,27, 87, 3715
Diodorus of, 136 f. Sidon, 74 Sieg, river, 3785 Siegburg, 378, Silesia, 124 Siloam, 1347, 135 Sinai, 144 Siwa(h), oasis, 17415
244, 348,
INDEX
Smyrna, xiii, xvi, 106, 107, 244, 266, 2697, 2814, 3487, 356, 3746
Socnopaei Nesus, 134, 2681, 3452, 3615
Sodom, 262,
South Shields, 4473, 4480
Spain, 3715
Sparta, 84
Stiris, 321
Strassburg, 37a 49, 43, 445, 541 564,
4034, Stratonicia, 1164, 3639 Stuttgart, 144 f. Sudan, 25 Syene (Assuan), 31,
1758»
Syme, 103 f. Syracuse, 25, 27 Syria, xiii, 6, 11, 14, 158, 841, I01,
109, 1134, 1295, 1303, 1311, 1553»
275, 300, 350, 353, 3785, 436,
4489, 461-464
North, 144, 233
372 48, 1215,
Talmi, 197,
Tamak, 462
Tantura, 753
Taphis (Tehfah, Nubia), 23,
Tapotheca, 235,
Tarsus, xiii, 8, 159, 2825, 291 383, 467
Tauric Chersonese, 362
Tebtunis, 40, 83, 85, 987, 1977, 3242» 3094, 3701
Tefeny, 223
Tegea, 3154, 372
Tehfah (Taphis), °N ubia, 234
Tekoa, 381
Tell el Yahoudieh (Leontopolis), 449,
Tell Hum (Capernaum), xiii
Telmessus, 144
Termessus, 315,
Thala, 362,
Theadelphia, 134, 189;
Thebaid, 2185, 3731
Thebes, the Memnonia, 221
ostraca from, 57, 105f., 121f., 124,, 166, 200, 353 1., 359 1., 370 papyri from, 31
Themistes division of the Arsinoite nome, 134
Thera, xv, 142, 280,, 2804, 286
Thessalonica, 925, 172, 2199, 237, 3143, 371, 43
T. hessaly, ae
This, 31
Thonis, 75,
Thyatira, 244, 3575» 374, 378,
Tiber, river, 135
Tiberias, xiii
Tiberias, lake, 253
Tithora, 321, 324.
Toéto, 214,
Toledo, 227,
, 381,
110 f., 204 f.,
Toronto, 76,
Tours, 128, Trachonitis, 91 Transjordania, 162 Trasimeno, lake, 254 Troas, 152 Tibingen, 354, 3951 Turin, 54
Tyana, 291
Tyras, 376,
Tyre, 2535
Valparaiso, 25, Venice, 43, Vercelli, 388, Verona, 4594
INDEX. 475
Vienna, xvi, 442, Archaeological Institute, xvii, 103, 150 f., 3047, 414 f. (Figs. 75-77) papyri at, 373, 2354, 457 publications, 13,, 17 statue at, 293 tablets at, 1004, 3332
Washington, 420, 61, Wiesbaden, 53.
i Yale University, 176 f. Yonuslar, 6
Zorava, 3785 Zululand, 29,
\
Π.---ΑΝΟΙΕΝΤ PERSONS
(The names of persons mentioned in the Bible ave IN SMALL CAPITALS)
AARON, 416, Aaron, 221 f. Abascantus, 2819, 436 Abdes, father of Cottio, 74, Abietas, 355 Abinnaeus, Flavius, 47, 216 ff., 234, 298, Abos, 89 Abraham, Bishop, 221-227 Achaemenidae, 363 ApDaM, 260, Adrastia, 321 Aeschylus, 122 f., 4174 Aesculapius, 3265. See Asclepius. “ Agathobulus, 209 (11. 24, 25), 210 21r . Agathopus, 376. See Aurelius. Agathus Dasnon, 1791. (1. 25), 255 and 259 (1. 3000) Alexander Aegus, 37, ALEXANDER I., BALA, 2535 ALEXANDER THE GREAT, 22, 65, 149 Greek world begins with, 4, 67 f. “letters ” of, 233 successors of (1.6. the Diadochi), _ 233, 343, 378, 423 Alis, 167 ff., 297 Ambrosius (St. Ambrose), 19849 Amenemapt, 400, Amerimnus, 1938» 13, 277 Ammon, 17510) 11, 30641 Ammonius, 2343 Amos, 381 Amyntas, a slave, 320, Amyntas, 326, ANASTASIS, 99 Anticles, son of Antiphanes, 305 Antinous, 291 Antiochus, King, 101 Antiochus IT., 344, AntiocHus III., THE GREAT, 370, Antiocnus IV., EPIPHANES, 3441 ANTiocHuUs VII., EUERGETES, 2535 Antiphanes, son of Patrocles, 305 Antoninus, 184, 186 Antoninus Pius, Emperor, 86, 3344,
362, 37528 dntpnis (Antonius) Longus, 1359, 1785, 187f.,, 216, 227, 229, 298 f., 350 Antonis Maximus. See Apion.
M. Antonius Celer, 443 M. Antonius Germanus, 443
Antonius Longus, decadarch, 189,
M. Antonius Longus Pullus, 189,, 443
Anubas, 236 °
Aphaea, 286
Aphrodisias, 168 f,
Aphrodite, 3445
priests of, 156,
Aphu, Bishop, 223
Apion, a soldier, 172, 179-186, 227, 297, 350
Apolinarius; 211
Apollo, god, 321 ff., 329
Apollo Nesiotes, 321
Apollo, presbyter, 46, 213 ff.
Apollodorus, son of Pyrrhus, 312
Apollonarin, 167, 169
Apollonis, 207 (1. 16), 20913
Apollonius, 189,5
Apollonius Dyscolus, 552
Apollonius, minister of finance, 152- 163
Apollonius, scribe, 173
Apollonius, son of Irene (?), 176
Apollonius of Tyana, 291
APOLLOS, 1598
Appion, Bishop, 48
Apuleius, 1373, 170,
AguiLa, husband of Priscilla, 117 f.,
2791
Aquila, translator of Old Testament, 302, 206
Archelaus, 202, 204. See Aurelius.
Archonica, 98,
Ares, 255 and 259 t. 2998), 3445
ARISTARCHUS, 437 f
Aristeas, Epistle of, 755, 1977s 3273) ἃν 418, 418,
Aristion, 165
Aristotle, 113, 1159, 2281, 231, 233
Arsacidae, 32, 34, 363,
ARTAXERXES, 372
Artemidorus, interpreter of dreams, 977, 104
ARTEMIS, 98, Diana.
Artemon, 228,
281,, 309. See
’ Cn. Arulenus, 445 f.
Asclepiades, an official, 361,
Asclepiades, son of Charmagon, 166
Asclepias, 328,
Asclepius, 135, 280,, 308, 321, 329, 310. _Asclepian village, 328,
Assa, King, 26
476
INDEX
Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria, 45, 215 : Athanasius, Bishop of Tapotheca,
2351 Athene, 255 and 259 (1. 2999), 321, 346 (Fig. 63) Athene Polias, 321 Athenodorus, 184,, 186, Atre, 222 Attalidae, 344,, 362, Attalus, 88 Attalus ITI., 324, Attis, 289, P. Audasius Paullus, 443 Aufidia, 184, 186 Augustine, 161, 240, 390 AucGustus, Emperor, 291, 299, “ Augustus Day,” 359 charagma of, 341 grandson of, 370 f. inscriptions in honour of, 99, 346 f. inscriptions mentioning him, ΙΟῚ, _ 345s 347, 366, 3786. ‘inscriptions of his reign, 124, 139, 394, 375, 4491 “letters of Augustus,” 374 papyrus mentioning him (“the Caesar ’’), 168, 3614 refuses the title ‘‘ lord,’’ 350 “saviour of the world,” 364 “the god Augustus,” 344f., 353, 361 (Fig. 69) Aurelia Arsinoe, 308, Aurelius, 123 M. Aurelius, Emperor. See Marcus. M. Aurelius Agathopus, 309 Aurelius Archelaus, 197 ff., 228,, 297 Aurelius Demareus, 308, Aurelius Demetrius Nilus, 92 M. Aurelius Eutychus, 97 Aurelius Paulus, 239 Aurelius Victor, 3539
Bacchylides, 2075
Badakiel (clerical error), 456,
Ballio, 317
BaRaBBAS, 269,
Barates; 4473
BarNnaBaS, 280,; Epistle of, 244,
Barucu, 34; Epistle of, 242
Bassus. See  Epidius, Ump.tuleius.
Batasis, 2810
Baucis, 280,
L. Bellenus Gemellus, 189,,, 298,
Beriis, 167, 169
Bictorinus, 4594
Blastus, 170
Bretasis, 2819
Brutus, 233
Bulla Felix, 291
Julius,
G. Caesar, grandson of Augustus, 370 1. J. Caesar, 344, 364, 402
477
ΟΑΙΝ, 226
Caligula, Emperor, 348,, 3554
Callimachus, 333,
Callisto, 328,
Caor, 2024, 21049, 216-221
Capiton, 179 f., 183
Caracalla, Emperor, 3751, 9
C. Caristanius, 5 (Fig. 1)
CaRPUS, 152
Carzoazus, son of Attalus, 88
Castor, 190,
Tit. Catius, 445 f.
Celsus, 393
Charis, 96
Charmagon, 166
Chrestophorus, 2155
Christophorus, son of Romanus I., 3785
Chrysogonus, 294 f.
Chrysostom, St. John, 3252, 3275,
, 3492 4332» 3» 460,
Cicero, 231, 233
Cintus, 326,
CLaupius, Emperor, 91,, 171, 347, 353, 364 :
Cleanthes, the Stoic, 55
CLEMENS, 4431
Clemens, a soldier, 443
Clement of Alexandria, 1155, 425
Clement of Rome, 23, 3241, 3479 3912» 416 f., 418
Cleochares, 305
Cleopatra, 352
Clisthenes, 52
Clodius Culcianus, Praefect, 92
Constantine the Great, 4
Copres, 184,, 186
Cottio, son of Abdes, 74,
Crates, 109,
Crinupelis (?), 306,
Crispus, 121
Crispus, a soldier, 443
CRISPUS, 121g, 4431
Cronos, 138 f., 306, 353
CYRENIUS, 270, 2714. See QUIRINIUS.
Cyril of Alexandria, 126,
Damoxenus, 134
DANIEL, 226,
Danoilos (a false reading), 122,
Daphnus, 312 f.
Darius, 37, ~
Davip, 462
Decius, Emperor, 46
DEMETRIUS, 113
Demetrius, author of De Elocutione, 228, 296,
J. Demetrius.
Aurelius Demetrius Aurelius.
Demetrius Phalereus (?), 178s, 7
Demetrius II., NICATOR, 344
Democritus, δὶς
Demophon, an Egyptian, 164 f.
Demosthenes, 71, 132, 233
See Julius. Nilus. See
478
Diadochi (=post-Alexandrian kings), See ALEXANDER THE GREAT,
Diana, 113. See ARTEMIS.
Didymas, 176 f.
Didyme, 173
Didymus (?), 1894;
Dio Cassius, 3545
Dio Chrysostom, 23, 336,
Diocletian, Emperor, 4, 465, 841
\ 211, 213, 273 f., 291 f., 2090,
Diodorus of Sicily, 87, 136 ff., 1635
Diogenes, 173
Diogenes (?), 328,
Diogenes Laertius, 23, 552
Diognetus, 170, 385,
Dion, 2352
Dionysia, 2393
Dionysius of Alexandria, 229,
Dionysius of Halicarnassus, 232
Dionysius, son of Harpocration, 83
Dionysus, τό, 321
Domitian, Emperor, 246,, 351, 355:» 362, 443-446
Donata, 2523
Dorcalion, 317
Dositheus, 368,
Exias, 380
ELIZABETH, 432, 434
Elpis, 1844,, 186
ENocH, 416
Epagathus, 1891} , Epaphroditus, an Beet 176 EPAPHRODITUS, 49,, 8 Epicharmus, 20743 Epictetus, 82, 97, 329s Epicurus, 2313
C. Epidius Bassus, 443 Epimachus, 179 ff., 183, 186 ERASTUS, 437
Erinyes, 96, 303 Euctemon, 179 f.
Eudoxus, 436
Euergetes II. See Ptolemy VII. Eumelus, 166
Eumnastus, 323
Eumoerus (?), 176,
Euphronius, 326,
Euripides, 452
Eusebius, 343, 703, 1264, 2292, 246,,
3494 Eustathius, 452, Eustathius of Thessalonica, 219, Eutychides, 236 Eutychis, 92
Faustina, 346
Fe.ix, Procurator, 5 Festus, Procurator, 5, 354 T. Flavius, 445 f. Fortunata (?), 184,,, 186 Fortunatus (?), 1844;
GABRIEL, 431, 433, 4561. Gatvus (of Derbe), 437
INDEX
Gatus (3 John 1), 1804, 242
Gaius (of Corinth), 437
Galen, 990, 374s
P. Galerius Trachalus, 445 f.
Gallico, female slave, 328;
Gallicus (?=the god Men), 328,
Ga.tio, Proconsul, 51
Gallonius, 179 f.
GAMALIEL, 381
Gamus, 436
Ge, 328, 330
GEHAZI, 226, 2274
Gemellus. See Bellenus. :
Gemellus, assistant to Sempronius, 19319, 195 ?
Gemellus, brother of Sempronius, 193 f., 196
Graecus Venetus, 437
Gregorius Thaumaturgus, 345
Gregory Nazianzen, 4339
Gregory of Tours, 128,
Hadrian, Emperor, 348¢, 36432 his face, 2933 inscriptions of his reign, 315, 360, 364, 376, 377 “letters ” of, 37513 papyri of his reign, 84 parusiae of, 368, 371 ff. verses to his soul, 292 Hanameel, 34 Harmiysis, 172 ff., 354 Harmonia, 2775 Harpocras, 200, 229 Harpocration, father of Dionysius,
3
Harpocration, writer, 85
Hatros (?), 306
Hecate, 3031, 3332
Helena, 193 f.
Heliodorus, 174, 298
Heliodorus, son of Sarapion, 236,, ,
Hetioporvs, Syrian favourite, 61,
Helios, 2819, 328, 330, 418,
Hémai, 222
Hera, 102
Heraclea, 414, 417, 423 f.
Heracles, 135,
Heraclides 190,
Heraclius, Emperor, 348
Herais, 189,
Hermes, god, 138f. 255 and 258 f. (11, 2993, 2999), 280¢, 305, 3523; Hermes Most Great, 2810, 352). See MERCURY.
Hermes, Imperial freedman, 377
Hermes Trismegistus, 83, 288,
Sextus Hermetidius Campanus, 445 f.
Hermodorus, 111 ,
Hermogenes, 116,
HEROD THE GREAT, 3531, 431
Herop Acrippa [., 353;
Herop Aarirpa II., 353;
Herod, Irenarch, 356
Herodotus, 132, 142,, 9
INDEX 479
Herondas, 82,
Herostratus, son of Dorcalion, 317
Hesychius, lexicographer, 1019, 225
Hesychius, Egyptian bishop and Biblical critic, 573, 461
Hiero, 328,
Hilarion, 167-170, 227, 229, 297
Homer, 132 f., 4185, 440,
Hor, 306
Horace, 233
Horus, god, 138, 2172, 255 and 258 (1. 2995), 3,353.
Horus, son of Permamis, 360
Hygeia, 96
Tanthe, 170,
Ignatius, 43
Ion, 3365
Iphis, 170
Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyons, 43, 3494 388,
Irenaeus, corn merchant, 211
Irene, 134, 176 ff., 297
ISAIAH, 39g. See also Index VI.
Isidorus, 123
Isis, 74, 136-140, 2885, 345, 3501, 352
Isis collections, 105, 110,'285
Isis, prayer to, 753, 1410, 2885
Isis, priest of, 10513, 3684
Isocrates, 231
IsRAEL, 226, 256,, 257 and 262 (1. 3055), 260,
acob, 221 ff.
acob, son of Job, 222
AHVEH, 34, 1373) 359 4053
AMES, 233, 242 f.
ASON, 437 f.
EREMIAH, 34, 257 and 261 (1. 3041) JEROBOAM, 226
Jerome, 429, 78, 128, 405
J 5
ESUS JUSTUS, 438 ESUS OF NAZARETH—
(i) Personality : a son of the East, 1 a carpenter, 8, 160, 396, 397 spoke Galilean Aramaic, 64 a man of the people, 246 f., 291,, 314, 397, 466. country-bred, 246 f., 275 friend of children, 170, 380 friend of animals, 275 (ii) Life: date of Nativity, 5, Jewish legends of His birth, 73 an inscription He may have seen, 80 sends fprth the apostles, 108 ff. healing of the blind man, 135, 307 healing of the deaf and dumb man,
304 healing of the crooked woman, 307 betrayal, etc. of, 125 ff., 225 f. scourged by Pilate, 269
Jesus or ΝΑΖΑΒΕΤΕ---
(iii) Sayings :
‘they have their reward,’ 110 f,
“judge what is right,” 117
“‘render unto Caesar,” etc., 252 ff., 264, 340
parable of the wicked servant, a
arallel, 270
other parables and parallels, 134,, 272, 299
the price of sparrows, 272-275
“a ransom for many,” 327 f.
“ Logia ”’ of, 425-429
other apocrypha, 44,
popular tone of His sayings, 69,
1350
‘wherefore art thou come? ” 125- 131 (iv) As viewed by Primitive
Christians and ancients :
popular titles applied to, 346, 349- 366, 388 f., 397
‘the Chief Shepherd,’ 99 ff., 397
“ High Priest,”’ 365 f.
‘the King,” 362
“ Lord,” 349-362
“ Saviour,” 363 ff.
“Son of God,’’ 346
His vicarious present activity, 336
His coming expected, 240, 339f., 368-373, 382, 389 f.
‘the marks of Jesus,’’ 301
‘Jesus and Anastasis ’’ preached by Paul, 99
legendary altar dedicated to Him by Augustus, 346,
name = 888 (gematria), 278,
name interpolated in a magical papyrus, 256 (1. 3020), 260,
invoked in execrations, 302 f.
invoked in inscriptions, 459
(v) As viewed by modern criti- cism : altogether unliterary, 245, 246, 380 altogether untheological, 380 embodies the most primitive Christianity, 250 f., 382 the object of the Primitive Chris- tian cult, 387 ff. His care for individual souls, 290,
299
the Redeemer, 389, 392
‘the sheer incarnation of religious inwardness,” 383
politically indifferent, 339
His attitude towards miracles, 386
His type of religious production to be worked out, 400 f.
certain critics try to wipe out the name, 246,, 266 f.
not included in the Berlin Proso- pographia, 291, 300
See also Christ in Index IV.
480
Jochanan, Rabbi, 260,
Johannes Eleemon, 126,
Johannes Moschi, 126,
JOHN THE Baptist, 291, 380, 430—
434 : JouN THE EvancELIsT, ST. JOHN THE
Divine :
at Ephesus, 281,
his attitude towards miracles, 386
his title ‘‘ Theologus,’”’ 348 f.
his type of religious production, 400 f. , i
parataxis in, 131-136
sclemn use of “ I,” 136-143
taste for strong effects, 287
uses metaphor of ‘‘ redemption,”
327 uses the form πλήρης, 123 ff. See Apocalypse, John, Revelation
in Index IV.
John of Antioch, 48,
John Chrysostom, St. See Chrysostom.
Jordanes, 92,
JOSEPH OF NAZARETH, 431
Josephus, 77, 80, 82, 87, 102, 115, 1211}, 291, 3082, 355. 3655, 3748 375» 44910
Judaeus, 320,
JUDAH, Testamentum, 100,
Jupas Iscariot, 125 ff., 226, 2271
JUDE, 242, 248
julia Augusta, 358,
Julian the Apostate, 126,
Julianus, 179f.
Julius, 193 (1. 14), 19319, 195
Tib. Julius Abdes Pantera, 74
Tib. Julius Alexander, 270, 358
M. Julius Apellas, 1534, 308
Julius Bassus, 315
Julius Demetrius, 358
Julius Domitius, 197-200
C. Julius Lucas, 4353
M. Junius Rufus, 445 1.
JUPITER (= ZEUS), 2804, 2815, 328, 330
. Jupiter Ammon, 174,
Justin II., Emperor, 348
Justin Martyr, 45
Justinian, Emperor, 348, 373, 4049, 45%
Justinus, 475, 1924, 220g, 229, 2364
21049, 215 8.,
Lassa, 222
Lazarus, 4159 Leonippus, 370
Levi, Testamentum, 92, Libanius, 1789, 2353 Ligdus, 170,
Liogenes (?), 328, Livia, 3411, 353, 3586 Livy, 42
Longus. See Antonis Longus. Lucanus, 436,
Lucas (Lucius). See Luxe.
INDEX
Lucas (Lucius), son of Gamus, 436 Lucas (on the Memnon colossus),
mie Se C, Julius Lucas.. Lucianus, 436, . Lucianus, praepositus cubiculorum, 232 Ljactan ea, priest of Antioch, Biblical critic, 3452, 461 Lucilius, 233 Lucius, 4362. See Lucas, LuKE. LuKE, 51., 272.  * accuracy, 270, 354 his dedications, 248 his name, 435-438 language, 87, 90, I16, 135, not in the Berlin Prosopographia, 291 pious exaggeration (?), 254 style, 69 unacquainted with St. Paul’s letters, 246 Lysanias OF ABILENE, 51, 353
Macrinus, 2810
Magarius (Macarius), 216
Marcus, 438. See Marx.
Marcus, father of M. Valerius Quadratus, 444 ff.
Marcus Aurelius, Emperor, 77, 97,
346, 3752 :
Maria. See Mary, Pollia,
Mark, St., 269, 304, 307. See Marcus. ~
Marthina, 415, 417, 423 f.
Martial, 82,
Mary, the mother of Jesus, 56, 281,, 430-434, 4594
Mary of Ephesus, 313
Mary, mother of Hor, 306
Mary, daughter of Abietas, 355
MattHEw, St., 64, 1295, 272, 307; Gospel of the Pseudo-Matthew, 433
Maurice, Emperor, 348
Maximus, son of Apion, 18449, 186
Maximus, son of Copres, 184,, 186
Maximus, brother of Sempronius, 192-196
Maximus, Papas, 206, 208, 210, 212 ἴ.
Maximus. See Antonis Maximus.
Melchiel, 457,
Melito, 3494
Men, a god, 328,, 435 f.
Menander, 368,
Menas, St., 56,
Menches, 98
MERCURY, 2804, 4573. See HERMEs.
MICHAEL, archangel, 431, 456 f.
Michael Tharrinos, St., 103 f.
Mithradates VI., Eupator, 370
Mithras, 289
Mnesiergus, 150 f., 227
Mnevis, 255 (I. 2994), 2581}
Moeris, lexicographer, 89,
INDEX
Moschion, 1670
*Moschion,” supposed physician, . 84
Moses, 349
Moses, 222
Munatius Felix, Praefect, 45
Mystarion, olive-planter, 170, 172
Naaman, 226
Nausias, 151
Nearchus, 174 f., 298
Nemesis (?), 321
Nero, Emperor, 275, 355, 379, 391 advent-coins, 371 mentioned in inscriptions, 345, 347,
354 ostraca of his reign, 105, 353 f. papytt, 173, 354 “the good god,” 345 “the lord,” 105, 3652 “ matricide,’’ 278 ‘saviour of the world,’’ 364 f. visit to Corinth, 354, 371 Nerva, Emperor, 3753 Nicaea, 323 Nicander, poet, 974 Nicetes, 356 NIGER, 4431 Nilus (?), 207, 209); Nilus, brother of Tasucharion, 234, Nilus, son of Politica, 215 Nilus, fifth-century Christian writer,
173 f., 3531.
~3
Nilis (?), 209,,
Nilis, mother of Antonis Longus, 1359, 187-191, 227
Ninus (?), 209}.
Noan, 262,
L. Nonius Calpurnius Torquatus Asprenas, 443, 445 f.
Nonnus, 143
ONESIMUS, 165., 279, 335
Opramoas, 17}, 104;, 294
Oribasius, 89:0
Origen, 345, 36, 703, 985, 224, 3452, _ 381, 405, 4373
Osiris, 1375, 138 ff., 3452
Otacilia Polla, 315
Ovid, 170,, 233, 2806
Pachomius, 215
Pacysis, son of Patsebthis, 204
Pamaris, son of Hermodorus, 1103, 11
Pan, 255 and 258 (]. 2996
Pant(h)era, 74
Paos, father of Psenmonthes, 200
Papiscus, 172 f.
Pap(h)nut(h)ius, 459, 473, 215 f.
Papus, 331
Paris (??), 131,
Pasion, 134
Pateésis, 105
481
Patermute, 222-
Patrocles, father of Antiphanes, 305
Patsebthis, 204
Paul, a deserter, 217, 220 f.
Paut, St., named as a chronological landmark, 294, 345, 347, 351, 355» 371, 405
(i) Personality :
a son of the East, 1
his home in Asia Minor, 115,, 312, 335
a Jew, 358, 450
a tentmaker, 8, 159, 313, 396, 467
his handwriting, 166,, 172, 174, 246
humour, 112, 166,, 331 f.
peevish moods, 438
his ‘‘ thorn in the flesh,” 158, 307 £.
attitude to nature, 274 f.
comparatively indifferent to politics, 339 f. :
contrasted with Zoilus, 157-161
presumably familiar with Imperial] institutions, 309, 340 f.
division of his world into East and West, 276,
closely united with the lower classes, 67, 159 f., 312 ff., 328 f., 466
as non-literary as Jesus, 245 f.
certain critics try to wipe out the name, 266
not included in the Berlin Pyro- sopographia, 291
(ii) Incidents in his life :
85. inscphion he may have seen,
fo)
a milestone he passed, 60
at Lystra, 280,
probability that he visited the islands, 279
his dream of the man of Macedonia, 300
at Athens, 12,, 99, 254, 264, 285, 384, 387-391 :
at Ephesus, 254 f., 264, 281,
at Corinth, 436 ff.
‘at Miletus, 451, 458
‘journey to Jerusalem, 436 ff.
arrested at Jerusalem, 80,
Jewish zealots swear to kill him, 2033
appeals to Caesar, 339
voyage to Rome, 211g, 423
his arrangements for the collection in Galatia and Corinth, 361
‘* perils in the sea,” etc., 181,, 279
cloak left at Troas, 152 :
(papyrus) books asked for, 30
(iii) Language : Nageli’s monograph, 20, 63 Cilicisms, 115,
482
Paul, St.—Language—(cont.) : words and phrases :
ἀπελεύθερος κυρίου, 377 αὐθεντέω, 88 f.
γινώσκειν ὑμᾶς βούλομαι, 1884 διαθήκη, 337
διαταγή, 89 ff.
ἔνοχος, 114 1.
εὐπροσωπέω, 98 ἴ.
κύμβαλον, 1645
κυριακός, 357 1.
λογεία, 104-107
μαλακός, τό4ς
μνείαν σου ποιούμενος, 1843 παραβολεύομαι, 88 πεπίστευμαι, 374
πρεσβεύω, 374
σπέρμα, 43, συναντιλαμβάνομαι, 87 ὑποτίθημι τὸν τράχηλον, 117 ἴ. ὧν τὰ ὀνόματα, 119
resemblances (not quotations) in Papyri, 197g, 198, 5, 200 resemblances (not quotations) in magical papyrus, 2614, resemblances (not quotations) in inscriptions, 310, 358 E. Norden on St. Paul’s style, 3 f. popular tone of his prose, 70, 125, 247, 2954, 3002, 314. fondness for legal expressions, 119, _ 318-338, 357 his use of the language of magic, 301-304 his use of aformula connected with healing, 307 f. his use of inscriptional formulae, 308 ff.
(iv) His letters : dictated, 166,, 236, 240 autograph signature, 166,, 171 f.,
303 begin with thanks to God, 181, intercessions, 158 f., 175 epistolary formulae, 181,, 197s, 1989, 3, 200 non-literary in character, 158 f., 233-241, 242 f., 251, 391 their frank self-revelation, 290 letters of commendation, 171 letter to Philemon, 165,, 216f., 237, 3341. Foy othey letters see Index IV. For quotations see Index VIa.
188,,
(v) His Christianity and mission- ary work :
1658 theological 381 ff.
his type of religious production to be worked out, 401
his hope of the Lord’s coming, 240, 339 f., 368 f., 382, 389 f.
than religious,
INDEX
St.—His “ Christianity and missionary work—(cont.) : transitoriness of this world, 282 f.,
f., 389 f.
sithade ταις miracles, 308, 386 comforts mourners, 178 Antichrist, 343 ara his preaching antagonistic to
Emperor worship, 346, 355 f. “ worshipping of the angels,”’ 453. preaches "‘ Jesus and Anastasis,”’
Patt,
99
background of his missionary labours, 275 f., 298 f.
the souls that he sought to win, 208 f.
his ‘‘ open door,” 300, ;
popular style of his missionary methods, 301
his generous estimate of paganism, 283, 310 1.
his employment of popular ethics, 312-317
his list of vices compared. with pagan lists, 316
his idea of freedom, 320,
his metaphor of redemption taken from the practice of sacral manumission, 319-330, 3507
his metaphors of debt and remission taken from legal practice, 330—
334 his use of the legal conception of agency, 334-337 his use of the word διαθήκη, 337 1. his use of ‘‘ Lord” facilitated the spread of Christianity, 350 f. Paul(ljus. See Audasius, Aurelius. Pauosis, 200 Pausanias, 25 Pecysis, father of Psenamunis, 105 Quintus Peducaeus Priscinus, 445 f. Permamis, father of Horus, 360 Permamis, father of Portis, 166 Peteme(nophis), son of Pic(os), 360 PETER, St., 57, 64, 181g, 199, 233, 243, 248, 307 Petosiris, father, 173 Petosiris, son, 173 Petoys, 164 L. Petronius Crispus, 443 L. Petronius Niger, 443 PHARAOH, 256 and 261 (1. 3036) Phibas, 236 Phibion, 269 f. ; PHILEMON, 165, 1843, 216, 332, Phiten, 6 Δ 5.93) Philo of Alexandria, 55, 755, 92, 102 _, 375» 405, 452 Philo, epic poet, 449, Philo, husband of Taonnophris 176 Philocles, 305 ἔ Philodemus, 758 Philonides, Epicurean, 118 Phlegethius, 269,
INDEX
Photius, 985, ἃ
Phthomonthes, 200
Pibechis, 256 (1. 3007), 259,
Pibuchis, son of Pateésis, 105, 107
Pic(os), 360
PILATE, 269, 2709
Pindar, 915, 4271
Plantas, 176
Plato, 71, 72, 387
Plautus, 317
Plenis, chief shepherd, 100
Plenis, son of Pauosis, 200
Pliny the Elder, 27 f.
Pliny the Younger, 112, 232
M. Plotius Fuscus, 443
Plutarch, 77, 805, 82, 97, 232, 284, 315
Polemon, 98
Politica, 214
Pollia Maria, 121
Pollux, 317,
Polybius, 77, 805, 3795
Polycarp, 356
Sextus Pompeius Collega, 445 f.
Pontianus, 3135
Portis, son of Permamis, farmer, 166
Postumus (?), 187.;, 188, 190 f.
Primitinus, 207-210, 212
PRISCILLA, 117 f., 2794
cee author of De forma epistolari,
126, 1679, 231, 3109,
115 f.,
Proce, ‘Neo-Platonist, 104, 1780
Protogenes, 370
Psate, 224-227
Psenamunis, son of Pecysis, 105
Psenmonthes, 200
Psenosiris, 46, 2083, 2104, 213 ff., 219, 228
Ptolemaeus, dreamer, 124, 134
Ptolemaeus, police official, 164 f.
Ptolemaeus, royal scribe, 173
Ptolemies, the, ats
Ptolemy, King, 3
Ptolemy 11., Puliedelpius: 152-155, 162 f.
Ptolemy IV., Philopator, 352
Ptolemy V., Epiphanes, .345,2, 352
Ptolemy VIL., Euergetes II., 3242
Ptolemy VIL, Soter II., 369
Ptolemy XIII., 352
Ptolemy XIV., 352
Ptolemy, geographer, 769, 104
Pumpulius, 436
Pylaemenes, 2352
Pyrrhus, 312
‘QUARTUS, 437
Quintilian, 2,
QuirInius, P. SULPICIUS, 51, 279, 2714
RapHAEL, archangel, 456 f. Regina, a Roman Jewess, 447-450 Regina, of the Catuallauni, 447,
483
Roma, goddess, 361 (Fig. 69) Romanus I. (919-945), 3785 Rufus, 235,
Ruphus of Ephesus, 89
SABAOTH, 257 and 202 (I. Sabina, 184 ff. Saitapharnes, 370 Samuel, 221 f. Sarapion, 236, Sarapis. See Serapis. SATAN, 2813, 302, 307, 3275, 3714 Saturnila, 192-196 Saturnilus, 193-196 Saturnus, 362, Satyrus, 310 Sauromates I., 363, Scythicus, 193, 195 SECUNDUS, 437 Seigelasis, 9019 Seleucidae, 344 Semphtheus, 165 Sempronius, 192-196, 227, 297, 3505 Sempronius, brother-in-law of Sem- pronius, 19349, 194 f. L. Annaeus Sencca, 232 Septimius Geta, 367, Septimius Herodianus, 363, Septimius Severus, 3751 G. Septimius Vegetus, 269 Serapis (Sarapis), 152-161, 179f., 182, 184,, 187 f., 193 ff., 241, 288, 297, 321, 329, 3512 Serenilla, 179 f. Serenus, 179 f., 182 T. Sextius Magius Lateranus, 443, 4451. Silco, 1373, 2179 Simeon, 222 Simon, 122, Simonides, 44049 Smicronides, 305 Socnopaeus, 362 Soeris, 149, SOLOMON, 257 and 261 (1. 3040) Judgment of, 276 Odes, of, 245» Proverbs of, 44 Testamentum Salomonis, 457, SopaTER. See SOSIPATER. Sophia, 457 f. Sophocles, 122, 390 Sophronius, 126, © Soranus, 84,4, 86, Sosibius, 323 SosIPATER, 437 f. Soterichus, 3206, Soterichus (a priest ?), 3629
3052)
_Sotion, author, 97,
Speratus, 356, 310,
G. Stertinius Xenophon, 253, 294, 345
Stobaeus, 2,
Stotoétis, a chief priest, 170 f.
Strato, 326,
484
Suchus (= Sebek, crocodile god), 269
Suetonius, 278, 362,
Suriel, archangel, 456 f.
SUSANNA, 22649
Syliel, archangel, 456
Symmachus, Old Testament trans- lator, 100, 2953
Synesius of Cyrene, 2352» 5
Tachnumi, 2343
Taisis, 306
Tannetis (?), 256 and 260 (1. 3024)
Taonnophris, 176 ᾿
Tarachus (Victor), 182.9
Tasucharion, 234,
Tauetis, 1359
Tays, 1885
Telethusa, 170
TERTIUS, 236, 240, 437
Tertullian, 211,
Theocles, son of Satyrus, 310
Theodosius II., Emperor, 48,
Theodotus, epic poet, 449;
Theodotus, martyr, 219,
Theodotus, son of Vettenus, 439 ff.
Theon (Theonas), son of Theon, 201-- 204, 2079, 2084, 21734, 229, 397
Theon, father of Theon (Theonas), 201-205, 21744
Theon, friend of Aur. Archelaus, 197 ff. ᾿
Theonas (Bishop, reputed author of letter to Lucianus), 232,
Theonas, steward (?) to Maximus, 208, 2105
Theophrastus, δὲς
Theophylact, 327,
Thermuthion, 176
Thermuthis (Thermuthion), 1931, 22
Tuomas, St., 361; Gospel of, 413,
3972
Thrasycles, 151
Thucydides, 132
ΤΙΒΕΕΙΒ, Emperor, 111, 252, 350, ᾿ 353 360, 3784
Tiberius 11,, 348
Tigranes, 363,
L. Tillius Crito, 435
Timanthes, 305
TIMOTHEUS (TIMOTHY), 1704, 437
‘Timotheus, poet, 37;
Timoxenus, 167,
Tiridates, 354
Titus, Emperor, 80,, 275, 364, 442
Trajan, Emperor, 1125, 355, 359% , 3625, 364, 3758, 4392
Triptolemus, 286
TROPHIMUS, 80, 437
Trypho, 372,
INDEX
Tubias, 162 ff.
TUBIAS, 163,
Tues Macrinus, 2819 Turbo, 179 f., 182 Twin-sisters, 124
Tyche, 255 and 259 (1. 3000) TYCHICUS, 1985, 437 Tycho, St., 126,
Ulfilas, 38, C. Umphuleius Bassus, 92 Uriel, 456,
Valens. See Vettius Valens.
Valentinian III., Emperor, 48,
Valeria Artemis, 445 f.
Valeria Heraclus, 445 f.
Valerius Aper, a soldier, 135
L. Valerius Clemens, 443
M. Valerius Quadratus, 442-446
L. Valerius Valens, 445 f.
Venetus, Graecus, 43,
Vergil, 4214
Flavius Verus (Severus ?), 90,
G. Julius Verus Maximinus (Thrax), Emperor, 367
G. Julius Verus Maximus, Emperor, 367_
Lucius Verus, 375
Vespasian, Emperor, 275, 3551, 364, 3655, 444, 446
Vestidia Secunda (?), 121
Vettenus, 440
Vettius Valens, 785, 86, 90, 95, 316;
G. Vibius Maximus, 270 f.
Ὁ. Vibius Salutaris, 113
Victor. See Tarachus.
P. Vigellius Saturninus, 356
Wihtred, King of Kent, 92,
_Wulfila, 38,
Xenophon, 72 XERXES (= AHASUERUS), 372
Zadakael, 456,
Zadakiel, archangel, 456 f.
Zaziel, archangel, 456 f.
Zeno, 152, 162, 1634, 1925
Zenobia,. 363,
Zenobius, an effeminate, 164
ZEUS (JUPITER), 280,, 2813, 330
Zeus Ammon, 17410) 43
Zeus, “‘ Hearer of Prayer,” 281,
Zeus-Hermes dedication, 280,
Zeus the Sun, 2810
Zidkiel, 456,
ZIMRI, 226,
Zoilus, 152-161, 227, 241, 287, 288,» 298, 308,
III—WORDS AND PHRASES
(In some cases the English equivalents will be found in Index IV.)
a weakened to ε, 95% ἀβάσκαντος, 19319, 280, ᾿Αβδῆς, 744.
ἀγαθὸς δαίμων, 3454 ἀγαθὸς θεός, 3454 ἀγάπη, 225) 758 ἀγγαρεύω, pore ἄγγελος, 280, ἁγιώτατος, 200; ἀγοράζω, 3241
ἀγών, 299" 5
ἀδελφή , τό, 1844, 2094
ἀδελφός, 98, 107, 179 (Il. 5, 14, 19),236
ἄδικος, 114g
ἀδίκως, 414 £., 417
εἰς ἀθέτησιν, 3373
αἷμα ἀναίτιον, 414 ἴ., 417 ἴς αἷμα ἐκδικῶ, 414 f., 420 αἷμα ext τῶ, 420 f.
αἷμα ἐκ; τ 414 f., 417 £. αἷμα ζητῶ, 41τ48,, "420 αἴρω, 129
αἰτέω, 22249
αἰώνιος, 3630 ἀκατάγνωστος, 75, 3374
ἀλήθεια in epistolary formulae, 298,
ἀλήθια (ἀλήθεια), 769 ae (ἀλλα) anak, 2179, 218; ογενῆς, 79 ἀλλουννῇ, bog ἀλλόφυλος, 80, ἄλωμα, 2810 ἂμ μή, 2024, iit ἁμαρτάνω, 18729 ἁμαρτωλός, 113 ff., 3174 ἀμέμπτως, 315, 3245 a πελών, 3358 ἂν = ἐάν, 202, ἀναβιόω, 97 f. ἀναβιώσκομαι, 98 ἀναβλέπω, 1358 ἀναγινώσκομαι, 353 ἀνάγκη, 158, ἀνάγνωσις, ΣΝ τἀναζάω, 97 f. ἀναζώω, 97 - ἀνάθεμα, 95, 3032 ἀναθεματίζω, 95, 3023 ἀνάλωμα, a poe ome 4 £., 20291 ἀναστρέφομαι, 107, 311ς, 312 ἀναστροφή, 107, 3119 ἀνεγκλήτως, 3265
ἀνέθεμα, 956 εὖ ἀ ἀνέχομαι, 207, 20949 ἀννώνη, 2071, 13 ἄνομος, 3174 ἀνόσιος, 3174 "ἀντί, 120 ἀντίγραφον, 162, 376, ἀντιλέγω, 194, 2043 ἀντιλήμπτωρ, 76 ἀντίλημψις, 107 ἀντιλογέω, 2043 ᾿Αντῶνις, 17999, 187 ff. ἀξιῶ, 414, 416 ἀξίωμα, 3378
ἀόνας, 2075 ἀπαίρω, 258, τὸ ἅπαξ, 2170 ἀπάτωρ, 4
ἀπελεύθερος Καίσαρος᾽ or Σεβαστοῦ, 377
ἀπελεύθερος κυρίου, 3264, 377 ἀπελευθερόω, 326. ἀπελευθέρωσις, 3274 ἀπερισπάστως, 326ς ἀπέχει, 1115, 112, 3234 ἀπέχω, ττο ff. ἀπό, 2οος, 326, ἀπὸ πέρυσι, 76 ἀπογεννάω, 1424 ἀπογραφή, 271 ἀποδίδωμι, 331, 332, ἀποκάλυψις, 779, 781 ἀποκαραδοκέω, 370ς ἀπόκριμα, 3373 “᾿Απολλῶνις, 20949 ἀπολύτρωσις, 323» 3274» 526 ἀποστηθίζω, 22244; 22311 ἀποτίνω, 3323 ἀράκιον, 20294 .dpatos, 96 ἀρετή, 318), 3639 ἄρον, 20a os ἀρότης, 30%, a 316g ἀρραβών (arrha), 3378 ἀρσενοκοίτης, 31ός, 3179 ἀρχιερεύς, 3651. ἀρχίλλας, ΤΟῚΡ ἀρχιποίμην, 99 ff. ἀρχιστράτηγος, 430 ff. ἀρχισυνάγωγος, 440 ἀσεβής, 114ς, 3174 αὐθεντέω, 88 f. αὐθεντής, 89g
485
486 αὐθιγενής, 81.
aan uxew, 89 ἀφελπίζω, 187, ἀφιλάργυρος, 85 f. ἀφιλαργύρως, 86 ἄφωνος, 2956
adv, 20745
ἄωρος, 414 f., 417
βαΐον, 76,
βασιλεύς, 362 ἴ. βασιλεὺς βασιλέων, 3565, 3632 βασιλικός, 362ς βασίλισσα, 3529 βασκαίνω, 19319 βέβηλος, 317, βιάτικον, 1814; βλέπω ἀπό, 120 βλέπω ἐμαυτόν, τ2ος βολεύω, 885 βοτρυδόν, 457, βουλή, 1125 βούλομαι, τ88ς βροχή, 81
ΤΙ teva, 2634 γεγραπται, 3373) 4444 Γεεννα, 263,
γινώσκω, 187ς, 217ς Tewa, 263,
γνῶσις, 378.4
γνωστεία, 3675 γνώστης, 7748, 3675 γράμματα, 348,, 375 ἴ. γυμνός, 292:
δαιμονιάζω, 256,
ὃ δάκτυλος τοῦ θεοῦ, 306, Δανοοῦλος (false reading), 122, δέ, 165, 22644
δεῖ, 1561, 1584, 7, 188. δειγματίζω, 76,
δεῖνα, 1625
δειπνέω, 3512
δειπνοκλήτωρ, 428,
δεῖπνον, 22511
δεισιδαίμων, 2853
δεσμὰς δεσμάς, 1234
6 δεσμὸς τῆς γλώσσης, 304 ff. δεσπότης, 3571, 3785 δημοσίᾳ, 1355
διά, 12146
διὰ τὸν κύριον, 1924 διὰ Χριστοῦ, 121|ς, 3371 διάγνωσις, 3429 διαθήκη, 3195, 337 ἴ. διακονέω, 3744 διάκονος, 222ς διάκονος Χριστοῦ, 376 διάκων, 94 ° διαλλάσσω, 18715 διαταγή, 89 ff.
ἐκ διαταγῆς, 9056 διάταγμα, 90,
INDEX
διάταξις, 90, διατάσσομαι, 90», 911 διατάσσω, 2094 διατίθεμαι, 90, διδαχή, 44%
δίδωμι, 339
δίδωμι ἐργασίαν, 116 δικαιοκρισία, 92 f. δίκαιος, 117, 3373 δίτροπος, 18719 δίχηλος, 1705
δόλῳ, 414 ἴ., 417 δόξα, 3630
δοῦλος, 109, 319 ff. δοῦλος Χριστοῦ, 3255, 376 δύναμις, 3639
δύο δύο, 122 δυσωπέω, 18741, 190, δῶμα, 44%
δωρεά, 3639
ἐάν for ἄν, 257.
ἐάν with indicative, 258,
ἐὰν μή, 2026, 21744
ἑαυτούς = ἀλλήλους, 1765 *EBovaaios, 257 (1. 3044), 2614, “Ἑβραῖοι, 157
-ἐγκόπτω, 1874,
ἐγώ εἰμι, 130-142, 2595 ἔδοξεν, 4445
εἰ in aposiopesis, 151, eixdviv, 17949 ‘ εἰμὶ eis, 120 f.
eis, 120 f., 170
εἰς for ἐν, 179,
εἷς (= ef), 131,
εἴσοδος, 198, ᾿ εἰσφέρῳ σπουδήν, 318, ἐκ διαταγῆς, 993.6 ἐκδίδωμι, 33ς
ἐκκλησία, 112 ἔ., 3515 κατ᾽ ἐκκλησίαν, 113, ἐλαιών, 76, 17ος ἐλάχιστος, 22247 ἐλευθερία, 323--327
ἐπ᾽ ἐλευθερίᾳ, 323, 324455 ἐλεύθερος, 323 ff. ἐλευθερόω, 326, 3275 ἑλκύω, 426
ἕλκω, 426 f,
ἐλλογέω caw 84, 3322
ἐλπίδι, ἐφ᾽, 187,
ἵ ἐλπίζω, 1 87,
ἐμμένω, 3373
εμος, 200g
ἐμφανής, 3738
Ψ ie adetnite article, 184, ἔναντι, 76, : ἐνδιδύσκω, 82
ἐνθήκη, 2075
ἔνοχος, 114 f.
ἐνταφιάζω, 775
de oa 208,0, 3375
ἐντολή, 222,, 348,, 376,, ΣΤΟΝ. 4 12 3796, 75 4404
ἐνώπιος, 498
- ἐξαγοράζω, 324, ἐξακολουθέω, 80,5 ἐξαναστατόω, 85 ἔξελθε, 256 (1. 3013), 260, ἐξουσία, 363, ἐξυπνίζω, 773 ἑορτὴ (τῆς) σκηνοπηγίας, 115 €op" τῶν) σκηνῶν, 115 ἐπάρατος, 96, 114 ἐπειδή, 2225, 2254
ἐπί, 125 f., 1355, 260g, 304), 417
ἐπιβάλλ ω,΄ 16 ἢ τὸ ἐπίβαλλον μέρος, 3378 ἐπιβατή ριος, 368, ἐπιδημία, 371,, 372637 ἐπιδιατάσσομαι, QO, ἐπιθυμητής, 108 ἐπικαλοῦμαι, 3941, 414, 417 ἐπικαταράομαι, 9 ἐπικατάρατος, 96 ἐπίξενος, III; ᾿ ἐπίορκος, 3172 ἐπιούσιος, 78. ἐπίσκοπος, 2229, 3373 ἐπιστατέω, 1539 ἐπιστολή, 229, 374 1. ἐπιστολὴ x ριστοῦ, 3744 ἐπισυναγωγή » 103 ἐπιφάνεια, 3711,4. 373 ἐπιφανής, 3445, 3738 ἐπιχρίω, 1355 ἐπόπτης, 3472) 418 ἔργον, 3131 ἔριφος, 165. ἐρωτάω, 1689, 17942 19315 ἐσοῦ, 2ΟΙς ἑταῖρος, 125 f., 129 ἕτοιμος, 222, εὖ, 20049 εὐαγγελίζω, 367, εὐαγγέλιον, 22249, 366 1. εὐάρεστος, 76 εὐβολεύω, 38, εὐεργέτης, 253 εὐθέως, 1795 εὐΐλατος, 76 εὔμοιρος, 1764 εὐπάρεδρος, 326, εὐπροσωπέω, 98 εὐπροσωπίζω, 98, εὐσέβεια, 318, εὔστομος, 174ς εὐσχημονίζω, 326 εὐσχήμων, 326ς εὔτομος, 1745 εὐφραίνομαι, 130 εὐχοριστέω, 1355, 1795 » 365ς εὔχομαι, 1794, 192g ἐφ᾽ ὅ, 126 ἐφ᾽ ὃ πάρει, 125 ff. ἐφοράω, 414 £., 418
fam. ΟἽ
INDEX
ἡγεμών, 2705 ἤδη ἤδη ταχὺ ταχύ, 421 ἤδη ποτέ, 200,
Ἢ: 3526 8 μᾶς = ὑμᾶς, 2045, 2009, 427ς ἦν (Ξ ἢ), τόδε
ἹΗράκλεα, 414, 417, 423 ἩΗράκληα, 417 Ηρακλοῦς, 44519
θέα, 3674 :
θεῖα γράμματα, 7° θεῖος, 91,, 347 f
θειότης, 348
θέλω, 1876, 374. 325. θέλω. .. ἢ. .., 1874 θεμελιόω, 440s, θεόγνωστος, 378, θεοκήρυξ, 349,
θεολογέω, 3494
θεολόγος, 348 f., 379 θεός, 343.
θεὸς ἐκ θεοῦ, 345::
θεὸς καὶ σωτήρ, 3445: 3 364, θεὸς ὕψιστος, 414, 416 Θεοσεβεῖς, 452, Θεοσέβιοι, 4511.
θεοῦ υἱός, ἜΣ f,
θεοφόρος, 348,
θεραπεύω, 1526
σὺν θεῷ, 208,
τῶν θεῶν θελόντων, 1799 Θεωνᾶς, 203,, 208, 210,, 232, θριαμβεύω, 363,
ὁ θρόνος τοῦ Σατανᾶ, 281, θυμοκάτοχον, 935, 3054 θωπεία, 102,
Taw, 4053
ἴδιος, 1703, 277 *TeBovoaiou, 2014, ἱερὰ γράμματα, 3751. ἱερατεύω, 76 ἱερεύς, 440, ἱλαστήριον, ees ἱλαστήριος, 408, ᾿Ιλλυρικόν, 276, ἱματίζω, 82 f.
ἵνα, 418 ἰσόψηφος, 277. ἰσχύς, 3639
Tw, 4953
καθ᾽ ee 18419 καθαρίζω, 76, 956 καθεριζω, 956
καί, 1321, 133 ao 192, kal... δέ, 1653 Καῖσαρ Beds, 2785, 3444 Καισαριανός, 377 Καίσαρος, 377 Καίσαρος οἰκία, 238,, 441 καλῶς ποιῶ, 208. κανών, 2229
Κάορ, 217,
487
488
καραδοκέω, 3735
καρπός, 336
κατά, 22213, 22513
καταγγελεύς, 99
καταδέω, 305
καταδουλίζω, 3252
καταδουλόω, 3253
κατάκρισις, 94 ἴ.
καταπέτασμα, 102 τ.
κατάρατος, 96
κατασκοπέω, 18741
κατενώπιον, 498
κατέχω, 3004
κατήγορος, 93
κατήγωρ, 93 ἷ.
κατοικέω, 4585
κινδυνεύω, 1797
κίνδυνος, 1797
κλέπτης, 316ς
κλίνη, 3512.
κοινά, 2565
κόκκινος, 82
κοπιάω, 312,4,» 3134) 57
κόπος, 313:»8
κοσμίως, 3151
κράτος, 363.
Κρήσκης, 3156
Κρινουπελι, 30641
κρίνω τὸ δίκαιον, 117
Κρονου πεδι, 3061
κτήτωρ, 4042
κτίστης, 1533
κύμβαλον, 1645
κυρία, 109, 351, 3526.8
κυρία, title of courtesy, 1675, 1926, 277
κυριακός, 76, 3 58
κύριος, 105159 173 £.,1796 1875, 349-357
κύριος, title of courtesy, 179s, 184, 18510 215, 217.
κύριος βασιλειῶν, 3524
κύριος βασιλεύς, 3526 9
ὁ κύριος ἡμῶν, 350 ff.
κύριος καὶ θεός, 361 ἴ.
κύριος τῶν πνευμάτων, 414, 416
κύρις, T8519
λακάω (?), 2636 λάμπω, 363.
λέγει, 3755) 697» 444μ λειτουργέω, 107 λειτουργία, 107 λειτουργικός, γ6 λεσῶνις, 171,
λῃστής, 3170
λίαν ἐχάρην, 184ς λιβλάριος, 17926 λογεία, 76, 104 ff. Aoyetw, 105
Aoyia, 104
λόγια, 3864
λόγοι ἐπιβατήριοι, 368, λόγος, 117
λοίδορος, 3164
λοιπόν, 18736, 202» 20 “Λούκιος, 435 ff.
INDEX
“Λουκᾶς, 435 8. λούω, τοῦ ΄ λύτρα, 328, λύτρον, 3281 λύτρωσις, 3275 λωτομήτρα, 2590
μαθητής, 22644 μακάριος, 1704, 177 μάκελλον, 2764 μακροθυμέω, 773 μαλακός, 1644, 316¢ Μάρθα, 417 . Μαρθείνη, 417 Μαρθίνη, 415, 417, 423 Μαρία, 12141, 396ὅς, 433 Μαριάμη, 1211 Μαρίαμμη, 1211 Μαρίαμνη, 12144 μαρτυρέομαι, 883 μαστιγία, 2598 μαστιγόω, 269ς μαυλίζω, 224 ff. μαυλιστήριον, 2251 μαυλιστής, 2251 μεγαλειότης, 3039 μέγας, 2693
μέγας μέγας, 2695 μέθυσος, 3164 μελετάω, 22245 μένω, 326ς
μετά, 2045
μετὰ καί, 1929, 1347 μητρολῴας, 3174 μίαν μίαν, 122ς μίσθιος, 773
μνείαν ποιέομαι, 1845 μοιχός, 3166
μυρία μυρία, 122ς
νεκρόω, 97
νέκρωσις, 983 νεόφυτος, 76
(ὀ)νικόν, τό, 81 νομός, 173, 271 νόμος βασιλικός, 362, νύκταν, 306:ς
ξενών, 4495 ξύμβολον, 1675
6 for ὅς, 3065
ὅ, interrogative, 126 ff. 6 ἐστιν, 433. 6 καί, 2809, 4521 ὀθόνιν, 1791 οἰκοδομέω, 160 ὁλοκληρία, 773
ὀ)νικόν, τό, 81
ὀνικός, 81
εἰς τὸ ὄνομα, 121, 3373 τὸ καλὸν ὄνομα, 277 κατ᾽ ὄνομα, 19321 ὧν τὰ ὀνόματα, 110 ὀπτάνομαι, 83, 256.
INDEX
ὅπως, 1879,
ὅς, interrogative, 126 ff,
οὕτως, 418
ὀφειλ 76, 331
πρὸ Tae: ἔχω (λαμβάνω, τίθημι), 1975 apres λαμβάνω, 168,
παπᾶς, 219, παπυρεών, 30, πάπυρος, 30 παραβάλλομαι, 88, παραβάλλω τὸν τράχηλον, 118, παραβολεύομαι, 88, 118, παραβουλεύομαι, 88, παραδίδωμι, 225195 302,, ἕ παρακαλῶ, 158. pw 2224, 307 4, παράκλητος, 336 παραμένω, 3263, 4
- παραμονή, 326 παραπέτασμα, 103, παρασιαίνω (9), 18795 παράτευξις, 208 πάρειμι, 125 ff. παρθένος, 734 πάρις (= πάρεις), 131, ὁ πάροδος, 1072, 2955 πάροικος, 108 παρουσία, 368, 430, 432 πατήρ, 209. πατρολῴας, 3174 πεπίστευμαι, 374 πέρατα τῆς γῆς, 885 περί (“" concerning’ ἢ, 153 f. περιδέξιον, 76 περισσεία, 84 ἀπὸ πέρυσι, 76 πήρα, 109 πίθος, 343 : πιστεύω, 3236) | 374 τὴν πίστιν τηρῶ, 3092 πίστις, 309, 318, πλανάω, 20246, MAGE, 2229 ° πλήρης, 123 ff. πληροφορέω, 86 f. πνεύματα, 414, 4161. ποιῶν 6. Ka θέλῃ, 324ς
- πολεμέω, 2045 πολιτική, 2145 ; πολλὰ κοπιῶ, 312 f. πολλα πολλων ὃ 168, 170 πόρνος, 734, 3165, 3174 ποταμοφόρητος, 49, 76 ποτήριον, 3514: πρᾶγμα, 3375 πραιπόσιτος κάστρων, 217, πραιτώριον, 238, πράκτωρ, 3373 "
πράξεις, 1351
489
πρεσβευτής, 374
πρεσβεύω, 374
πρεὐβύτερος, 49, 213 ff., 22246, 19) 337» 3095, 440,
προβαδίζω, 431 ff.
προεστώς, 209, Φ
προκόπτω, 17015, 378ς
προσευχή, 76, 102,
προσκαρτερέω, 102,
προσκαρτέρησις, 102
πρόσκομμα, 775
προσκύνημα, 1741)
προσκυνήτής, ΙΟΙ
προφήτης, 226,
πρωτότοκος, ΟἹ
πτερυγοειδῶς, 4572
πτοή, 42745
πτόησις, 42715
πυρράκῃς, 76
πῶς, 18 728
ῥήτωρ, 94
σαγήνη; 773 Σεβαστή, 358 fi. σεβαστόγνωστος, 3784 σεβαστολόγος, 348, σεβαστοφόρος, 348, σεβόμενοι τὸν θεόν, 451g σειτομέτριον, 104, Σεκοῦδα = Σεκοῦ(ν)δα ὃ 1210 σεληνιάζω, 256,
ov for σέ, 2174, σημεῖον, 1679, 3864 σιαίνω (avyaivw), 18755 Σίμων, 122, σιτομέτριον, 76, 104, σκηνοπηγέομαι, 115 σκηνοπηγία, 115 σπέρμα, 437
σπορά, 43, 226ς σπόρὸς, 437
σπουδὴν εἰσφέρω, 318, στέφανος, 3094, 5, 312, 369, τὰ στίγματα τοῦ ᾿]ησοῦ, 301 στοιχεῖον (elementum), 404,, 408, συγγενής, 432, 438 συγγενις, 432 συγκληρονόμος, 92 συλλαμβάνω, 432 σύμβολον, 1670 σύμφωνος, 200,
ἐκ συμφώνου, 3373
σύν, 2594, 260,, 302 £. σὺν θεῷ, 208,
σὺν καί, 134ς
σὺν Χριστῷ, 303, συνάγω, 22243 συναγωγή, 103
συναΐίρω λόγον, 117 συναντιλαμβάνομαι, 8) συνήγωρ, 941" συνίστημι, 2352 σύνοδος, ἡ Ys. 3752 σύνοδος, ὁ, 2953
490
σώζω, 1798
σῶμα, 1655, 3239.7 Σώπατρος, 437. σωσικόοσμιος, 364 f. σωσίκοσμος, 3653 Σωσίπατρος, 4378
σωτήρ, 308, 3445, 363 ff. σωτὴρ τοῦ κόσμου, 364 1. σωτηρία, 17913 19317 σώφρων, 3144) 3155» 67
τάδε λέγει, 375517 ταλαίπωρος, 414 ἴ., 417 ταπεινόφρων, 7794
ταπεινόω, 419
ταπεινόω ψυχήν, 419
τάττω, 209,
ταῦτα (abrupt), 2034, 312ς ἐν τάχει, 421
τὴν ταχίστην, 414 f., 421 ταχύ, 421
τέκτων, 160,
τέλος, III,
τηρέω, 3°91, a» 3245 τήρησις, 3373
τιμᾶς (τιμῆς), 323, 324, τιμὴ, 3241, 3» 363
τίς (asa relative), 126, 3135 τοπαρχία, 173,
τόπος, 211,
τράχηλος, 117 ἴ.
τρία τρία, 1234
τρόπος (in formulae), 18715 τυχόν, 1516
ὑγιαίνω, 1794
ὑγιγαίνω (ὑγιγένω), 18755, 202, ὕδωρ, 440,
υἱοθεσία (adoption), 3373 ὑμνῳδός, 3494
ὑπέρ, 120, 1664, 331, 3354 ὑπὸ Δία Γῆν Ἥλιον, 328, ὑποζύγιον, 162,
ὑποτάσσομαι, 22210
ὑποτίθημι τὸν τράχηλον, 117 ἴ. ὕψιστος, 2605
Φαρισαῖος, 257 (1. 3044), 2614, φαρμακεύω, 414 f., 417 φεννῆσις, 10515 Φερεζαῖοι, 261) φίλανδρος καὶ σώφρων, 3155) 6.7 φίλανδρος καὶ φιλότεκνος, 3144 φιλανθρωπία, 3630 φιλία, 765 φιλοκαῖσαρ, 378 φιλοπρωτεύω, 76, φίλος, 1525, 377 f. φίλος τοῦ Καίσαρος, 378, φίλος τοῦ Σεβαστοῦ, 378. φιλοσέβαστος, 378 φιλόσοφος, 3157 φιλόχριοστος, 378, 4594 όβος, 140, φοβούμενοι τὸν θεόν, 4514
INDEX
φονεύω, 414 f., 417 φόρος, 14045 φρεναπάτης, 76,
χάραγμα, 341
χαρακτήρ, 341)
χάριν, 188,
χάρις, 3639
χάρτης, 30
χεῖραν, 17944, 2029 χειρόγραφον, 3312, 332 ff.
χειροποίητος, 174
χειροτονέω, 222ς
Χερσαῖοι, 257 (1. 3044), 2611} Χετταῖοι, 2611. :
χῆραι πῆραι, 109,
χιάζω,33..
χοίρειον, 2584
χουοπλάστης (χοοπλάστης), 2573 χρηματισμός, 1531 χρηστήριον, 440;
«Χριστιανός, 377
ὃ χριστός and Χριστός, 328, Χριστοῦ, 377
διὰ Χριστοῦ, 12146, 3371 χριστοφόρος, 2158
οσὺν Χριστῷ, 303.
χρόνος, 218,
χωρίζομαι, 3375
ψεύστης, 317) ψιθυρισμός, 77ς
ὠνή, 3235 ᾽Ωριγένης, 217} ὥς, 2581,
actus, 1975, 1983 adventus, 371
in aevom, 448 f. amicus Caesaris, 378; annona, 2074 avatrum, 388, arcanum, 1745 arpax, 316.
‘avvha, 3373
bule, 112,
caenum, 3172 Caesavianus, 3775 Caesavis, 377 Calymna. 4453 cinaedus, 316, cinaidus, 316, cline, 3513 coccina, 82, cognit10, 342, collegium, 211g comitia, 112, contego, 448 f. contio, 112%
deus dominus, 3624, 5
dicit, 3756 4444
dignus, 448 f.
divi filius, 346
divinus, 914, 347
dominus, 1974, 198 dominus et deus noster, 362,
ebriosus, 3166
ecclesia, 112 f., 447 elementum, 404,
enteca, 2075
ab epistulis Graecis, 3743 evictio, 3373
fides, 448 f. fraudulentus, 317, fur, 316, +
gaudesne? 316, genus, 448 f.
Hierosolymna, 4453
impudes, 3164 impudicus, 317 inpurus, 317,
legatus, 3741, 4454 legivupa, 317, » libellarius, 17996 librarius, 17996
. libri litterarum adlatarum, 2354 libri litteravum missarum, 2353
lumen, 448 1.
manumissio, 3223, 33% meruit, 448 1. Methymna, 4455 metuentes, 451g
mMoecus, 3164
MoOtcus, 3166 mystevium, 1745
observantia legis, 448 f.
ant’ oculos habeo, 1977, 1993 odie, 1979
omo, 1979 ᾿ operam do, 1164
parricida, 3174
paticus, 3164
perturus, 3172
pernities adulescentum, 3178 pontifex maximus, 366 praefectus castrorum, 2171 praesistere, 448. ~
pretio magno, 3242
INDEX 401
promitto, 448 f. pudicus, 448 1.
vedemptio servi suis nummts, 322, responsum divinum, 1531
vix vides, 3165
rursum vivo, 448 f.
SaceY, 37512
sacvae litterae, 376 SACYALISSIMUS, 37515 Sacrilegus, 317, sanctissimus, 37512 Sanctus, 37512 scelestus, 3179 scriptum est, 4444 sedes, 448 f. solacium, 448, 450 spevo, 448 f. SUCCESSOY, 1975 surgo, 448 1.
transigo, 448 f. trico (?), 316,
vinosus, 31664 visum est, 4445
abba, 64, 113 Abdes, 74. amen, 113
Barabbas, 64 Ebed, 742
(kategor), 93 f. Revamét, 64
lesonis, 1714 liblay, 17996
malkah, 4473 mammon, 64 Marana, 350% Martha, 64, 417 .
Pantheva, 73 1. (peraklit), 3365 phennésts, 10543 sanegor, 941 scyhend, 225. shuck, 2254
shy, 2254
talitha cumi, 64
IV.—SUBJECTS
Abbreviations, xxi, xxii; of titles of papyrus publications, 40,
Abide with, 326
Abinnaeus, correspondence of, 218
Ablanathanalba, 252 (1. 3030), 256, 4521. ᾿
Abyssinian magical text, 3369
Accession of Emperor, 3454, 36410
Accounts of deliverance from danger, 284, 307, 399
Accounts of dreams, 124, 134, 399
Accounts of the miraculous, 97,, 284,
9: Accounts of visions, 399 Acknowledgment of debt, 331 ff. Acquainted with God, 378 Acquainted with the Emperor, 3784 “ Acta Pauli,” Heidelberg MS., 373,
44 Acts,” apocryphal, 373, 424, 249 Acts of the Apostles, 135,, 246, 248 Acts of the Apostles in Coptic, 44, Acts of the Arval brothers, 371 “ Acts of Heracles,” 135, Acts of John, 42, Acts of Peter, 42, Address (in letters), 495, 1513, 1723 Adoption, 834, 337s Adulation of the emperors, 3561, 3595,
3614
Advent, 368-373. Epiphany, Parusia
Advent-coins, 368, 371, 373
Advent-sacrifices, 368, 371
Adventure, travellers’ tales of, 399
Advocate, 336. See. Agency, Media- tor, Paraclete
Aeolic dialect, 66, 111
Agathus Daemon, 179 f. (1. 25), 255 (1.3000), 259 (1. 3000), 3454
Agency, 1184, 12144, 1664, 331, 335 ff.
Alexandrian cult, 3454
“ Alexandrian ’’ Greek, 103,
Alien tax, IIT,
All-seeing Lord, 418
Alpha and Omega, 389
Ambassador for Christ, 374
American archaeologists and scholars, 15. See also Index V: Angus, Burton, Cobern, Curtis (T. E. A.), Durham, Exler, Ferguson, Freer, Graffenried, Hatch (W. H. P.), Kent, Magie, Norton, Richter, Robertson, Robinson, Sanders, Schodde, Thayer
See Epidemia,
-Anglo-Saxon.
Ammonites, Sheikh of the, 162 ff.
Amos, fragments of, 42
Amulets, 48,, 59, 240, 2603, 284, 405
Analogy and genealogy, 265 f.
Anathema, 95, 2271, 302 ff.
And... and, 131-135
“ Angel” inscriptions, 279 f.
Angels, 93, 416, 418
Angels, cult of, 418, 4531, 453 Β΄.
See English, Old.
“« Anglo-Saxons,” 3010
Animals, 162 f.,-105,, 258, ; fondness for, 163
Annona, 207,
Anthology, the Greek, 91, 97
Anthology in the Tebtunis Papyri, 85
Anti-Atticism, modern, 4
Antiatticist (lexicographer), 122,
Antichrist, 3433, 371
Aorist, epistolary use of, 1704, 1763
Aorist-present, 110,
Apamenian cohort, 179 f., 18294, 183
Apocalypse, 25. See Revelation
Apocalypse as literary genre, 248
Apocalypses, 249, 287,
Apocalyptic numbers, 276 ff., 344
Apocrypha (0.T.), 55; (N.T.), 1910
Apocryphal literature, 249
Abpolytrosis, 3274, 5
Apophthegms, collections of, 429
Aposiopesis, 151,
soa character of their religion, 160 f.
Apostles, their equipment, 108
Apostolic Fathers, 1910
Appealing to Caesar, 339.
Aquila’s translation of the O.T., 30,» 206
Arab tattoo marks, 4555
Arabic ostraca, 53
Arabic papyri, 374
Aramaic, 64 f.
Aramaic ostraca, 523, 4 53
Aramaic papyri, 372» 1213
Aramaic parchments, 32
Aramaisms, 69,, 934, 1855
Archangel inscriptions at Miletus,
453 ff. Archangels, cult of, 459 Archangels, monograms of, 456 Archangels, names of, 456 f. Architect, 160 Areopagus, St. Paul’s speech, 384, 387-390 Aretalogy, 386,
492
INDEX
Army, Roman, 74, 179-186, 197-200, 216-221, 442-446 -
Army, Roman, religion of the, 289,
Arrest for debt, 270, 330
Artisans, 247, 3139
Artistic literature, for the world, 250
Arval brothers, 371
Asclepian village, 328,
Asian rhythm, 70,
Aspirate, vulgar, 188,
Assault, 134
Assembly, 112 f.
Asses, 162,; wild, 163,
Associations, religious, 375. Guilds
Astrologers, 783, 865, 904, 95g, 3164, 455s, 4595 .
Athanasian Controversy, 452
Athenonica, centuria, 8041
Atonement for murder, 415 f.
Atonement, Great Day of, 420-424
Atonement, narratives of, 399
Attic dialect, 66
Atticism, Atticists, 66 ff., 69,, 71 f.,
73, 122g, 125, 128 f., 132 f.
Atticism, modern, 4
Augment, misplaced extension of, in ‘vulgar Greek, 9558
Augustus, minister of, 376
Augustus Day, 359 f.
See
Austrian investigators, 13,;, 17.» I12-f., 393
Authenticity, questions of, 243
Authorities, communications ad-
dressed to the, 148, 172 ff., 3614, 3705 Autograph conclusion to letters, 166,, 171 f.
Babylonian letters, 184,
Balts, 80
Barley, price of, 273,
Baruch, Epistle of, 242
Bath tax, 36049
Beauty in simplicity, 72, 312 f.
Beds, to watch, 222 f.
Beggar-priest, 109, 350
Beggar’s bag, 109
Begging-letter, 186,
Behaviour, 311 f.
Belgian archaeologists and scholars, 159. See also Index V: Cumont, Grégoire
Belgians on Congo, 29,
Belief, formula of, 3453
Belonging to Caesar, 377
Belonging to Christ, 377
Belonging to the Emperor, 377
Between, zwischen, 123,
Bible, history of its use, 23, 464
Bible text, Egyptian, 575
Bible text, history of the, 23
Bible text of Hesychius, 57,, 461
Bible text of Lucianus, 461
Bible translations, 38,, 127, 1445, 447- 450
493
Biblia Pauperum, 1445
Biblical fragments, 40-44
‘* Biblical ’’ Greek, 62 ff.
“ Biblical” Latin, 112 f., 447-450 Biblical MSS. in Thera, 280, Biblical papyri, 40-44
Biblical passages on ostraca, 56-60,
2239 Biblical quotations, 23 f., 461-464 “ Biblical ”’ words, 75 ff. Bill of complaint, 134 f. Bind (in magic, etc.), 304-307 Birthday, 184 (Il. 18, 19), 18519, 11, 366 Bishops, “ epigraphic,’’ 12, Blind, healing of the, 135, 307 Blood, to shed, 417 f. Boatman’s idiom, 71 Body (Christ), 389 Bond. See Note of hand Bond of the tongue, 304-307 “ Bondservant,” 319, Borrowed words, 77, 93, 941, 18296 Bought for ready money, 3242 Boys, model, 204,
Bread (Christ), 389
British and Foreign Bible Society, 1444, 5
British investigators, 13:1, 9, 4035 See also Index V: Allen, Bartlet, Bell, Brooke,. Budge, Calder, Cowley, Crum,Curtis (W. A.), Edgar, Grenfell, Hall, Harris, Hatch (E.),
Hicks, Hill, Howard, James, Kennedy, Kenyon, Lightfoot, Mahaffy, Marshall, Meecham,
Milligan, Minns, Moore, Moulton, Paton, Patterson, Petrie, Ramsay, Redpath, Sayce, Smyly, Swainson, Swete, Thackeray, Thompson, Trench, White, Wilkins, Wilson, Wood, etc._ J Bronze inscriptions, 11 Brother (Christ), 389 Brother and sister, tween, 138f., 167, Building, 160 ᾿ Building law, ancient, 319 Buying-off, 327. See Redemption By two and two, 122 1.
marriages be-
Caesar, appeals to, 3392
Caesar, belonging to, 377
Caesarian, 377
Caesarism, 338,
Caesars, cult of the, 252, 2785, 289 f., 338 ff., 387
Calendar, Asian, 366
Calendar, Egyptian, 3592, 433
Calendar, Greek, 185149
Calendar inscription of Priene, 3493, 3516 370f.
Canon, Muratorian, 197, 1970, 1983».
249 Canon of the New Testament, 67, 250- Canticles, 462 f. 5
494
Captivity, St. Paul’s, letters written during, 237 f.
Cases, vulgar use of, 1219, 18519
Catacombs, pictures in, 275; inscrip- tions, 157, 185, 1003, 2271, 3031, 44%, 4413, 447-450
Catholic epistles, 242 ff.
Catuallauni, 4478
Census, 270 f.
Certificates of confession, 46,
Ceryzes, Asclepian village of the, 328,
Chapters, gospel divided into, 58
Chavagma, 341
Charm, protective, 453 ff.
Charms, 59;, 93, 142, 255-263, 304-- 307, 454-459
Charta Borgiana, 48, 94
Charters, Old English, 92,
Chélingas, ΟῚ
Cherubin, 257 (l. 3061), 262,
Chi (Greek letter), 333
Chiasmus, 427,
Chief Shepherd, 99 ff., 389
Children, exposure of, 168,, 169 f.
Chinese lists of vices, 315,
Choirs of Greek temples, 287
Christ, ambassador for, 374
Christ, belonging to, 377
Christ and the Caesars, 338 ff.
Christ-beaver, 2153
Christ, contemplation of, 382
Christ, cult of, 378 ff., 382, 387 ff.
Christ’s descent into hell, 43
Christ, following after, 390
Christ's freedman, 326, 377
Christ, friend of, 377 £., 4594
Christ, guilds of, 391,
Christ, insignia of, 341 f.
Christ, letters of, 245,, 374 f.
Christ, minister of, 376
Christ, monogram of, 47, 2221, 2554,
1
ve mystic appreciation of, 378, 382
Christ, parables of, 134,, 270, 272
Christ, past and’ present work of, 329, 336, 382
Christ, slave of, 323 ff., 350,, 376
Christ's sufferings, 96,
Christ, through, 12146, 337
Christ, titles and offices, 388 f.
Christ, with, 303,
Christian, 377
Christian inscriptions, 23, 280, (?), 2956, 453 ff., 461 ff.
Christian letters, 46f., 197 ff. (Ὁ), 205-227, 2110 (?)
Christian new formations (words), 78
Christian papyri, 40-48
Christian solidarity, ix, xix
“ Christian ᾿᾿ words, 75 ff.
Christianity, origin of, 3952, 465 ff.
Christianity, Primitive, 7 ff., 378-391
Christianity, Primitive, its literary development, 245 ff.
INDEX
Christianity, Primitive, its moral earnestness, 390 f. : Christianity, Primitive, not inter-
ested in politics, 339 f.
Christianity, Primitive, its popular
character, 246 f., 385, 388 f.
Christianity, Primitive, social struc- ture of, 71.
Christianity, vulgar, 161
Christians, persecution of, 46, 137, 213 ff., 342
Christians, their social solidarity, 213
Christolatry, 382 :
Christology, 342,, 382
Chronicle as literary genre, 248
Chronology, 5, 3592
Church inventories, Byzantine, 47
Church, manumission in the, 3223, 3393
Church, the Primitive, 382, ,
Cilicisms, 1151
Cities, cosmopolitan, culture of, 246 f.
Cities, great, 280-283
Cities, great, culture of, 282 f.
Cities, great, Greek of, 70
Cities, sequence of names, in Revela- tion, 3746
Civilisation, ancient, its unity, 52
Civilisation of -the Imperial period, 282 ff. ;
Civilisation, Mediterranean, 2
Civilisation, rural, 247 f.
Class-division, 80, 159 f.
Classes, lower, 7;, 246 f., 290 ff., 328 f., 338 £., 394-397
Classes, upper, 7,, 246f., 338 f.
Clay for anointing eyes, 1354
Clementine edition of Vulgate, 127
Clergy, Egyptian, standard of learn- ing of, 222 ff.
Codex, 382, 429, 448
Codex Brixianus, 38,
Cognomina, 4431
Coins, 252, 2535, 3441, 3454, 3636, 368, 371, 373 3
Collections for Isis, 105, 110, 285
Collections for religious and chari- table objects, 105, 160, 285, 361
Collegium naviculaviorum, 211,
Colloquial language, 66 f.
Colossians, Paul’s letter to, 237f.,
43: Comedy, 1331, 317 Comfort, words of, 405 f. Coming again, 368, Commandments, 3766, 1, 44% Commandments, divine, 348, 376 Commandments of God, 376 Commendation, letters of, 171, 197 ff.,
2352 Committed to my trust, 374 Communications to the authorities, 148, 172 ff., 3616, 3705 Communion tokens, 46, Complaint, bill of, 135 Complaint, letter of, 134 f.
INDEX
Complaint of the priests of Isis, 368,
Confession, certificates of, 46,
Confession of sins, 1359, 187-192, 216,
ee  υσῖο of sins in inscriptions, 192, 204
Confessions of faith, 345,
Conjuration, 4214. See Exorcism
Consolation, formulae of, 177 f.
Consolation, letters of, 176 ff.
Consolation, words of, 413, 405 f.
Consolatories (old books of edifica- tion), 249 4
Constitutional law (Roman), 343
Contracts of sale, 33 ff.
Contrition, letters of, 178,, 187-192
Conversation, 1993, 228,
Conversation, to have, 311
Coptic ostraca, 505, 53, 221-227
Coptic papyri, 375, 44
Copticism (?), 2179
Copy ofa deed, 33 ff.; ofaletter, 162 f.
Copy-books (for letters),-206,, 235 f.
Corinthians, Epistles to the, 236 f.
Corinthians, Second Epistle to the, 239, 266, 279
Corn, dealings in, 207 ff.
‘Corn, order for payment of, 90ς, 121
Corn, price of, 273,
Corn, requisition for, 369
Corn ships, 211 f.
Corn of Wheat (title of Christ), 389
Corner Stone, 389
Corpora of inseriptions, 12-18
Corpus of Christian Inscriptions, 23 f., 464
Corpus of papyri, 40
Correapartdedee of Abinnaeus, 218 f.
Correspondence, family, 2362, 298,
Cosmopolitan cities, 246 f.
Cosmopolitan Greek, 22, 62 ff.
Cosmopolitan Judaism, 45. Jews: Diaspora
Cosmopolitanism, 3659
Council of Arles, 221
Council of Toledo, 227;
Counters, playing, 316
Country civilisation, 247 f.
Country labourer, 10544
Court society, 155
Court titles, 152,, 378
Covenant, 3195, 338
Covenant or Enactment? 337
Creation of all from naught, 258 and
_ 263 (1. 3077)
Creeds, 3452; nople, 3452 |
Cross, bond nailed to, 332 f.
Cross rosette, 280,
Crossing-out of documents, 333 f.
Crown, 309, 369
Crown of glory, 369
Crown of righteousness, 369
Crucified, The, 389
Cult, Alexandrine, 3454. Christ ©
See
Creed of Constanti-
See Caesars,
495
Cult and law, 343
Cult, Christian, words employed in, 388 f
Cult literature, 2490, 251
Cult, obscure, 156
Cult of archangels, 459
Cult propaganda, 157-161, 241, 298,
3454
Cult, solemn style appropriate 19, 136-142
“Cult words,” sequences of, 388,
Culture of the Imperial period, 282 ff.
Culture of the Imperial period, re- ligious, 284 ff.
Culture, Mediterranean, 2
Culture, parallel in Egypt and Palestine, 268-272,'275,, 353
Culture, rural, 247 f.
Culture, studied with political method, 264,
Cuneiform inscriptions, 5
Cup of daemons, 3514
Cup of the Good Daemon, 3514
Cup of the Lord, 351,
“Cup ’’-formulae, in cults, 351
Cups, 129 ff., 351; inscriptions on, 129 ff.
Cures, miraculous, 284
Cures, records of, 135, 307 f., 399
Curse, Jewish zealots bind them- selves by a, 203,
Curses, 227,
Cursing, formula of, influenced by Septuagint, 240
Cursing tablets, 22,, 233, 94f., 284, 302 ff.
Cynics, 109,
‘Daemon, Good,” 179 f. (1. 25), 255 and 259 (I. 3000), 3454, 35%
Daemon of the dead, 302,
Daemon, headless, 142
Daemon, name of, exorcism, 261,
Daemonic possession, 307
Daemons, trio of, 2611}
‘Daily News, The,’’ 400,
Danger, narratives of deliverance from, 284, 307, 399
Danish investigators. See Index V: Bréndsted, Drachmann, Jespersen, Nielsen
Date (of letters), 1725
Dative, 202,
Day of Atonement, Great, 420-424
Day of the Lord, 3572
Days for effecting payments, 361
Days of prayer and fasting, 420
Deaconess, 227,
Deacons, 60, 221-224
Death and drinking, 295
Death, meeting after, 303,
Debt, 330 ff.
Debt, acknowledgment of, 331 f.
Debt, arrest for, 270, 330
important in
496
Debt, letter acknowledging, 332
Debt, slavery for, 330
Decalogue, Hebrew papyrus, 38;
“ Decomposites,’”” Greek,
Dedications, religious, 284
Deeds in duplicate, 33 ff.
Deeds of purchase, 34 f.
Deissmannism, 68,
Deliverance, 327
Deliverance from danger, narratives of, 284, 307, 399
Deme called Σωσικόσμιος, 364 f.
Demotic characters, 1393
Demotic ostraca, 505, 53
Demotic papyri, 37
Denarius of Tiberius, 252,
Desecrators of tombs, 114, 227,
Deserters, 217, 220 f.
Despotes, 357
Deuteronomy in Coptic, 44,
Devils, table of, 351
Devotion (= execration), formulae of, 94 f., 302 ff.
Devotion, Christian, titles in, 388 f.
Diaconate, candidates for the, 60, “221-224
Dialect, Galilean, 64
Dialects, ancient Greek, 66
Diaspora, 122, 289,, 422 f. See Jews
Diaspora, map of the Jewish, 289,
Diatribe ‘as literary genre, 243, 248, 3299
Dictionaries, 401 ff.
Dictionary, Egyptian, 402
Diligence, to give, 116
Diploma, military, 84, 443 ff.
Diptych, 442-446
Disease, 135, 153 f., 156 ff., 307 1.
Distributive numerals, 122 f.
Divine, 3471.
Divine commandments, 348, 376
Divine grace, 348
Divine writings, 348, 376
Divinity, 348
Divorcement, bills of, 324,
Do the things that ye will, 324 f.
Do ut des religion, 156,, 160 f.
Docketing of letters by officials, 157
Documents crossed out, 333 f.
Documents in duplicate, 33 ff., 162 f.
Documents with three witnesses, 33a 4
Dogs, 162 f.
Dominate, 352
Door, the (title of Christ), 389
Door, the open, 300,
Doric dialect, 66 ©
Double compounds in Greek, 96,
Double names, 452,
Dream of Ptolemaeus, 134
Dream-spectres, 935
Dreams, accounts of, 124, 134, 152 ff., 399
Dreams, interpreter of, 97
INDEX
Dreams of the twin sisters, and of Ptolemaeus, 124
Drinking and death, 294 f.
Drinking cups, 129 ff., 351
Dues payable in Egypt, 54, 339s
Duplicate deed, 33 ff.
Duplicate letter, 162 f.
Dutch investigators. See Index V: Bergh van Eysinga, Herwerden, Leemans, Loman, Michelsen, Plooij, Teyler, Zwaan
Earthen vessels, MSS. in, 34f., 34s, 361, 44 Ebionite 2469 ee ee Edicts, imperatival infinitive in, 80, Edification, 160 Educated stratum, 466 Education of clergy, 222 ff. Egypt, Bible text current in, 5758 cults in, 285,, 288 dues payable in, 54; 3393 endogamy in, 138 f., 167, gods of. See Index II: Ammon, Horus, Isis, Nero, Osiris, Serapis, Socnopaeus, Suchus_ Praefects of, 45, 92, 269 ff., 358 sacral texts from, 137, taxes in, 360 See also Index I Egyptianism in Greek, 269, Elegiac couplets, Jewish, 449, Embankment tax, 360, Emperor, accession of, 3454, 36419 Emperor, acquainted with the, 378. Emperor, belonging to the, 377 Emperor, friend of the, 377 1. Emperor, slave of the, 376 Emperor-worship, 252, 2783, 289 f., 338 8., 387 | Encomia, early Christian, 45, Endogamy, 138 f., 167, English Dialect Dictionary, 225, English, Old, charters, 92,; glossary, 2251; gospels, 127, Enoch, book of, 416 Enrolment for taxation, 270 f. Entrusted with the gospel, 374 Ephesians, Epistle to the, 237 f. Ephesians, letter to the (Rom. xvi.), 234 ff. Epidemia, 371, 3726 > “ Epigraphic bishops,” 12, Epigraphy, 11 ff., 467 Epiphanies of Sarapis, 152, 154, 157 Epiphany, 3711, 3722, 373 Epistle as literary genre, 248 Epistle of Baruch, 242 Epistle of Theonas to Lucianus, 232, Epistles, 149, 229 f., 232 f., 248 Epistles, catholic, 242 ff. Epistles, letter-like, 230 Epistles, Pastoral, 238, 279, 309, 311, 373
interpolations, supposed,
INDEX
Epistles, Primitive Christian, 242 ff.
Epistles of Dionysius of Halicar- Nassus, 232
Epistles of Horace, 233
Epistles of Lucilius, 233
Epistles of Ovid, 233
Epistles of St. Paul, 233 ff., 391
Epistles of St. Paul to be learnt by
eart, 223
Epistles of St. Peter, 242, 248, 317
Epistles of Pliny the Younger, 232
Epistles of Plutarch, 232
Epistles of L. Annaeus Seneca, 232
Epistolary formulae, 1804, 5, 17, 1, 1845, 1856, 2322, 298,
Epistolary literature, 149
Epistolary style, 162,, 163,, 242
Epistolary style, preterite of, 171,
Epistolography, 147,
Eponym-day, 358,
Era, Seleucid, 34
Essenes, 2551 "
Eternity, hope of, 389, 448 ff.
Ethical concepts, 311
Ethics, ancient popular, 308-318
Ethics of the workshop, 314
Etymology, 4035
Etymology, popular, 25949
Evangelischer Wochenbrief, ix, 32,, 229s, 3981, 4409
Examination subjects for Egyptian ‘deacons, 60, 222f. |
Excavations, xvi, 31, 398 f.
Excommunication, formulae of, 227,
Excommunication, letter of, 224-227
Execration, 94 f., 301-304 -
Exorcism, 256 and 260 (1. 3019), 306,
Expansion of Gospel conceptions, 328,
Expiation, narratives of, 3995 ᾿
Expiation of murder, 415
Expiatory inscriptions, 192, 284
Exposure of infants, 168,, 169 f.
Eyesalve, 136,
Faith, keep, 309
Family letters, 236,, 2984
Family life, ancient, 164 ff., 192 ff., 201 ff., 399
Family sympathy, 195 f.
Fasting, days of, 420
Fear God, they that, 451
Feast of Tabernacles, 115 f.
Fellowship, 302 f., 390
Fervour, priestly, 70 f., 238
Festivals, tents erected at, 1156
Fight, 309
Figurative language (religious), 318 ff., 332 £.
Finance and religion, 152-161
Finger of God, 306,
First person singular, stately use of, 134, 136-143 :
Folklore, ancient (= science of
. ancient beliefs), 399; (= the be- liefs themselves), 287
497
Folklorist, 7
Fool, the rich, 294,
For freedom, 323 ff., 329
Forgiveness, 330
Forms, literary, history of, 147 f.
Forms of expression, popular, 396
Formulae, epistolary, 180,, 5, 17» 18» 1845, 1859, 2322, 298,
Formulae, fixed, in N.T. language, 116 f.
Formulae, magical, 93, 142, 255-263, 394-397, 454-459
Formulae of belief, 345,
Formulae of consolation, 177 f.
Formulae of excommunication, 227,
Formulae of thanks to God, 1815
Formularies, Christian, books of, 325., 3296
Foundation stone, 440,
Free, 323 ff.
Freedman of Aesculapius, 3262
Freedman of Christ, 326, 377
Freedman of the Emperor, 377
Freedman of the Lord, 326, 377
Freedom, St. Paul’s idea of, 3194
Freer Logion, 415
French investigators, 13, 133, 145, 8,
23, 57 ff., 320. See also Index V: Blouet, Boisacq, Boissonade, Bonnet, Bussemaker, Cagnat, Clermont-Ganneau, Daremberg,
Dussaud, Egger, Fossey, Foucart, Gernet, Heuzey, Hohlwein, Holleaux, Homolle, Jalabert, Jouguet, Juster, Lafoscade, La- grange, Le Bas, Le Blant, Lefebvre, Lesquier, _ Letronne, Maspéro, Meillet, Michel, Mispoulet, Per- drizet, Plassart, Reinach, Rouffiac, Rouvier, Savignac, Toutaia, Weill Friend of Christ, 377 £., 4594
- Friend of the Emperor, 377 f.
Friends, Society of, x,. See
Quakers
Galatians, Epistle to the, 237
Galatians confused with Galen, 98,
Galilean dialect, 64
Game played with counters, 316 f.
Ge(he)nna, 258 (1. 3072), 2634
Gematria, 276
Genealogy and analogy, 265 f.
Genesis, 424
Genitive absolute, 1345
Genitive of the authority offended, 1143
Genitive represented by nominative, 1219
Genizah, 36,
Genres, literary, 147, 1493, 247
Gentiles, their piety, 285-288
German investigators, 13f., 366. See also Index V
German science and learning, x
German trawler, 400,
498
Giants, 257 (1. 3059), 262ς
Give diligence, 116
Glory, crown of, 369
Gnostic fragments, 44
Goblets, inscribed, 129 ff.
God, 196, 343 ff.
God, acquainted with, 378
God and Lord, 361
God and Saviour, 3445, 3648
God-fearing, 451 f.
God, finger of, 306,
God, formulae of thanks to, 181,
God, herald of, 349.
God, Image of (Christ), 389
God of God, 345,
God of the Hebrews, 256 (1. 3019), 2604
God, Son of, 346 f., 389
God the captain of the boat, 400,
God, the good, 345
God, the Most High, 321, 416
God, they that fear, 451
God, Word of (Christ), 389
God's commandments, 376
Gods of the country worshipped by foreigners, 184,
Gold tablets, 11, 303,
“Good Daemon,” 179 f. (l. 25), 255% and 259 (1. 3000), 3454, 3514
Good god, the; 345
Good Samaritan, 134,, 272
Gospel, 366 f.
Gospel as literary genre, 247
Gospel committed unto. me, 374 __
Gospel conceptions expanded, 328,
Gospel (?), fragment of a, at Cairo,
430 H. Gospel, fragment from Oxyrhynchus,
30 Gospel ostraca, 56-60, 144,, 223, Gospels, 391
Gospels, fragments of, 40 ff., 57 ff.
Gospels, synoptic, 69, 248
Gothic gospel fragment, 38,
Grace, divine, 348
Grace or works? 161, 338
Graeco-Sahidic fragments Psalms, 44
Graffiti, 6,, 11, 276 ff., 303,
Grave-diggers, 214
Greek, cosmopolitan, 22, 62 ff.
Greek, Hellenistic (Kowy), 22, 63-68, 87£., 90 f., 104, 418,
Greek investigators, 16. See also Index V: Bees, Evstratiadis, Hatzi- dakis, Jannaris, Konstantinidis, Papamichael, Sophocles, Zolotas
Greek language, ‘‘ Alexandrian,” 103,
Greek, Middle, 123
Greek, modern, 39, 82, 123, 133, 440,
Greek, ‘‘ New Testament,” 62 ff.
Greek papyti, 32 ff.
Greek, Patristic, 4049
Greek, universal, 22, 62 ff.
Greek, vulgar, 167 f., 188, 201 f.
“ Greek,’ what is, 4, 1324
of the
4
INDEX
Greeting. See Salutation Greetings in letters, 18117, 234 Greetings, long list of, 235, Groschenbibel, 144
Grove (of a temple), 153 f. Guarantors, 222 ff., 3233 Guild of seamen, 2119 Guild of shepherds, 100, Guilds, 390,
Guilds of Christ, 391, Guilds, religious, 375
Hagiology, 249
Hand, note of, 331 ff.
Hands, kohanim, 416,
Hands on tombstones, 414 ff.
Handwriting, contrast of, 173 f.
Handwriting, rustic, 240
Head (Christ), 389
Healer (Asclepius), 370
Healey (Christ), 308
Healing, accounts of, 135, 307 f., 399
Healing, miracles of, 284
Heaven, letters from, 245, 374 f.
Hebraisms, 93, 119-123, 1855, 197,
Hebraists and Purists, 71
Hebrew ostraca, 52,
Hebrew papyri, 38,
Hebrews, Epistle to the, 42, 70f., 206, 243 f., 249, 251, 365, 383
Hebvews, God of the, 256 (1. 3019), 260,
Hebrews, Gospel according to the,
397s
Hecate of Callimachus, 333,
Hedonistic religion, 160 f.
Hell, 263,
Hell, Christ’s descent into, 43
Hellenisation of Egyptian gods, 288
Hellenisation of Judaism, 322, 413 ff., 423, 452 {
Hellenisation of the East, 2, 34
Hellenistic Greek (Kow?), 22, 63-68, 87 f., 90f., 104, 418,
Herald of God, 349
Herb mastic, 259,
Herculanean rolls, 755, 117 f.
Hereditary lease, 33
Hesychius, Biblical text of, 575, 461
“Heteronymous” _epistolography, 233, 243 ,
Hexameters, Jewish, 448, 449,
Hexapla, 985
Hieratic ostraca, 505, 53
Hieratic papyri, 400,
Hieroglyphic papyri, 38
Hieroglyphs, 139s, 375
High Priest (Christ), 365, 389
Historical things, distinct from
_ things holy, 2
Hocus-pocus, 25919, 264
Hodja (khoja), 69, 359
Holy, 37519
Holy day, 3718 :
“ Holy, not historical,” 2
Homologos (= labourer), 105,,
INDEX
Horoscopes, 18549, 284
Horses, 162
“‘ House-church,” 278, ᾿
House of prayer, manumission in, 321, 3223 Η
Humble the soul, to, 419 f.
Hunger strike, 203,, 204
Husbandmen of the lake, 200
Hymn, early Christian, 43,
Hymn to the Virgin, 56
Hymnodi, 346, 349, 360 f.
Hypatia, Kingsley’s, 38,
Hyperbole, 88,
Hypotaxis, 132
Hypsistarians, 452,
I am, 136 ff., 2595
“T-style, 133 £., 136-143
Ideal of womanhood, 314 f.
Identifications, 189,, 437
Ignatius, fragment of, 43
Iliad, papyrus fragment, 30
Image of God (Christ), 389
Immortality, hope of, 389, 448 ff.
Imperatival infinitive, 80,, 151,
Imperial, 377
Imperial accession, 3454, 36410
Imperial cult and Imperial law, 343
Imperial letters, 84,, 374 ff.
Imperial ordinances, 443-446
Imperial period, 282 ff., 467
Imperial period, religious culture of, 284 ff.
Imperial slave, 160, 2383, 377, 441
Imperial stamp, 341
Importunate widow, 1359, 272
Imprecations, 227,
Imprisonment for debt, 270, 330
In the name, 62,, 121
Incantation, repetition of, 421,
“ Incubation,” 152,
Indian magic, 304
Individual souls, 290-300
Infinitive absolute (= imperative), 804, 1511, 5 :
Inflections, shrinkage of, 124
Ink, 52
Inn attached to synagogue, 440
Inscriptions, 11 ff.
Inscriptions, ‘“‘ angel,” 279 f.
Inscriptions, archangel, at Miletus, 453 ff.
Inscriptions on bronze, 11
Inscriptions, Christian, 23, 280, (?), 2055, 453 ff., 461 ff.
Inscriptions, Christian, Corpus of, 23 f., 464.
Inscriptions, corpora of, 12-18
Inscriptions, cuneiform, 5
Inscriptions, expiatory, 192, 284
Inscriptions on stone, 11, 398
Inscriptions on tombs, 6,, 294 f., 309 f., 312 f., 315, 447 ff. _
Inscriptions, votive, to god Men,
4351.
499
Inscriptions. See also Christian, Jewish.
Insignia of Christ, 341 f.
Inspiration, 67, 251
Intercession, 152, 154 f., 159,, 174 f., 1843, 1875, 194,,, 216
‘Intercession ’’ (legal), 332,
Intercultural characteristics, 249
International cities, 246 f.
International communication, turbed by war, 440,
International excavations, xvi, 398 f.
International Greek, 22, 62 ff.
International understanding through Churches, ix, 398,, 409
Interpreter of dreams, 97
Inventories, Byzantine church, 47
Inventory of temple furniture, 102
Investigation. See Methods
Investigators. See American, Aus- trian, Belgian, British, Danish, Dutch, French, German, Greek, Italian, Norwegian, Russian, Swedish
Tonic dialect, 66
Iota adscript, 94,, 167
1.0.U., 331-334
Iranian philology,
Irish Biblical scholarship, Old, 128,
Islam, 374, 221, 2234,
Islands, Christianity in the, 279 f.
Islands, civilisation of the, 279 f.
Islands, intercourse with, 279 f.
Isolative method of New Testament criticism, 62, 67 f., 393 f.
Isopsephism, 276 ff.
dis-
Itala, 127
Italian investigators. See Index V: Breccia, Buonaiuti, Calderini, Ferrari, Franchi, Ghedini, Mondini, Sangiorgi, Sogliano, Tamassia, Vitelli
Mined St., Epistle of, 69, 233, 242 f., 2
Jar, fragment of, from Wiesbaden, 53, Jar, MSS. in, 345, 361, 448 Jerusalem campaign, veterans of, 442-446 ‘ Jesus, conversations of, after the Resurrection, 44, Jesus, marks of, 301 Jews and Judaism : “ beware thee of the Jews,” 120 cosmopolitan Judaism,. 45 Diaspora : at Corinth, 15, ° in Egypt, 381, 452, 122, 355 law in, 319, 321 f. at Miletus, 451 f. at Pompeii, 276, propaganda, 387 in Rheneia, 413-424 at Rome, 15,, 66, 447-450 works on, 289,
500
Jews and Judaism—(cont.) : Hellenisation of Judaism, 322, 413 ff., 423, 452 ; idea of agency in Judaism, 3353 Jewish elements in magic, 254-263, 305 f. ; Jewish fellow-workers of St. Paul,
Jewish Greek, 122, 122,
Jewish Greek Bible, cosmopolitan, 387,423
Jewish inscriptions, 16,, 192, 80,
- 2695, 289, 321 £., 413-424, 439 ff., 447-450, 4511.
Jewish law, 319, 321 f.
Jewish manumissions, 321 f.
Jewish martyrs, 355, 43 _
Jews mentioned in papyri, 192, 45, 120; in ostraca, 355
Jewish names, 121 f., 306. Crispus, 1215 Danoilos, 122,
Maria, 121 f., 306, Regina, 4473 Simon, 122,
Jews of Palestine, 179
Jewish papyri, 381, 452
Jews, persecutions of, 459, 355
Jewish poll-tax, 355
Jewish Praefect of Egypt, 358
Jewish precedents in formulae of anathema, 227,
Jewish records (not discussed in this book) illustrate the New Testament, 68,,-400
Jewish revision of LXX (9), 437
Jewish traditions at first non- literary, 2,
Jewish translation of Genesis (?),
437 Jewish words (?), 81, 1154 learning by heart in Judaism, 223,, supposed Hebraisms, 120-123, 197, βλέπειν ἀπό, 120 δύο δύο, 122 f. εἶναι εἰς, 120 f. εἰς τὸ ὄνομα, 121 πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν ἔχειν, 1977 ᾿ the name Panthera not a Jewish invention, 73 f. vulgar Judaism, 161 Johannine style, 69,, 123 ff., 131-143 Johannine texts, aristocratic features over-emphasised, 248, Johannine texts, doctrinaire features over-emphasised, 2499 Johannine writings, 69 f., 336 John, St., Acts of, 42. John, St., First Epistle of, 131, 232), 244, 248 f., 364g, 401 John, St., Second Epistle of, 495, 232,
241 f. John, St., Third Epistle of, 232,, 241 f. John, St., Gospel of, 42,4, 69 f., 123 ff., 222 f., 2329, 248 f., 3644
INDEX
John, St., Gospel of, in Coptic, 443
John, St., Revelation of, 42ς, 69, 244, 248, 341, 348 f., 362f., 374 ἴ.
Jom hakkippurim, 420-424
Jonah in Coptic, 443
Judaism. See Jews
Jude, Epistle of, 242, 248
Judge (Christ), 389
Judge the right, 117
“ Judgment of Solomon,” 276;
Keep faith, 309
Khan, attached to synagogue, 440,
Khoja (hodja), 69, 350
King, 362 f., 389
King of Kings, 3565, 362 f.
King’s Day, 359s ;
Kingdom of Christ in liturgy, 3422
Knecht, 3192
Kohanim hands, 416,
Koine (Kowy, Hellenistic Greek), 22, 63-68, 871., gof., 104, 418,
Kyrios martyrs, 355
Labour, 312 ff.
Labour in vain, 314,
Labouved, much, 312 f.
Labourers (homologi), 10544 Labourers in the vineyard, parable,
314 Labourers, manual, 246, 3136 Lady, 109, 1675, 192g, 350, 3526 8 Lady queen, 352, Lake husbandmen, 200 Lamb of God, 389 Language, colloquial, 66 f. Language, missionary, 300 Language of magic, 301-307 Language of the workshop, 312 ff. Language, original, of the New Testament, 64 Language, popular, 9, 22, 55, 62 ff. Languages, number of, 262, Laodiceans, letter to the, 237 Lapidary style of St. John’s prologue,
125 Latin, ‘ Biblical,” 112 f., 446-450 Latin gospel fragment, 38, Latin ostraca, 53 Latin papyri, 37
_ Latin, vulgar, 197 ff., 249
Latinisation of Greek words, 112 f., 446-450
Latinism, 116 f.
Law, 269 ff.
Law of the constitution (Roman), 343
Law, popular, 318-337
Law, the royal, 362,
Lead, letters on, 150f., 151,
Leaden roll from Rhodes, 23,
Leaden tablet from Hadrumetum, 233, 263, 18
Leaden tablets, 11, 95, 117, 150f,, 302, 303, 305
Learning by heart, 222 ff.
INDEX
Lease, hereditary, 33
Leather as writing material, 322, 552
Lectionary (?), 60 i
Legal expressions and ideas in the New Testament, 119,, 318-337
Legal writers, 78,
Legends of saints, 249 f.
Leib, Gut, Ehry, Kind und Weib, 3045
Letter acknowledging debt, 332
Letter, begging, 186,
Letter, copy of, 162 f.
Letter copy-books, 206,, 235 f.
Letter of complaint, 134 f.
Letter of excommunication, 224-227
Letters, 148 ff., 227 ff., 296-299, 374 ff.,
399 Letters, address in, 495, 1513, 1723 Letters, ancient Babylonian, 184, Letters, ancient collections of, 236, Letters and epistles in N. T., 233 ff. Letters, autograph conclusion, 166,, 171 f. Letters, Christian, 46f., 197 ff. (9), 205-227, 2119 (9) Letters, conclusion indented, 2104, Letters, docketed by officials, 157 Letters, epistolary, 230 Letters, family, 236, 298, Letters from heaven, 245, 374 f. Letters, greetings in, 181,,, 234 Letters, Imperial, 845, 374 ff Letters, Jewish, seventeenth century,
1499
Letters of Alexander the Great, 233
Letters of Aristotle, 228,, 231, 233
Letters of Brutus, 233
Letters of Christ, 245,, 374 £.
Letters of Cicero, 231, 233
Letters of commendation, 171, 197 ff., 2352
Letters of consolation, 176 ff.
Letters of contrition, 178), 187-192
Letters of Demosthenes, 233
Letters of Epicurus, 231
Letters of Isocrates, 231
Letters of Persian kings, 375,
Letters of Plato, 231
Letters of recommendation, 197 ff., 235 fi
“Letters of the captivity,” St. Paul's, 2374.
Letters of the Emperors, 374 f.
Letters, religious, 284
Letters, tying up of, 18294
Letter-writers (treatises), 1774 191g ὃ Ρ
Letter-writing, its history still un- written, 399 f.
Lexicography, 49s, 461 ff.
Libellatici, 46
Libelli, 46
Libertines, synagogue of the, 441
Liddell and Scott, Greek Lexicon, 769: 790, 816, 897, 1424, 20713) 4035
Liddell and Scott, a correction, 323,
171,
ancient,
501
Life (Christ), 389
Ligatures, 456
Light (Christ), 389
Linguistic importance of the new texts, 62 ff.
Lion cloth of St. Anno, 378,
Literary and Non-literary, x, 2,, 4, 147 ff., 228 f.
Literary development of Primitive Christianity, 245 ff.
Literary history applied to the New Testament, 147 ff.
Literary language, 66 f.
Literature, artistic, 244, 247, 250
Literature, epistolary, 149
Literature of the Imperial period, 2 f.
Literature, popular, 247
Liturgical history, 3332, 342.
Liturgical use of Kingdom of Christ,
3424,
Liturgies, Greek, 459 f.
Liturgy, Mithraic, 289,
Livy, Epitome of, 42
Loan-words, 77, 93, 941, 18205
Logia fragment, First, 29, 413
Logia fragment, Second, 413, 4, 425 ff.
Logia fragment, Third, 41,
Logia, translation of, xx f.
Logion, the Freer, 41,
Logos, 69, 125, 248, 348
Lord, 10535, 173 (1. 30), 174, 1805, 1875, 349-359, 301 f., 389
Lord and God, 361
Lord King, 352 f.
Lord of the diadems, 352
Lord of the spirits, 416
Lord, Our, 351
Lord's day, 357, 359 ᾿
Lord's freedman, the, 326, 377
Lord’s Prayer, 391
Lord’s Prayer on a fragment of earthenware, 563, 57>
Lord’s Prayer on papyrus, 48,
Lord’s service, 357 f.
Lord’s supper, 357
Lorvd’s table, 351
Lord’s treasury, 357
Lotometra, 256 (1. 3009), 2599
Lower classes, 7,, 246f., 290 ff., 328 f., 338 1., 386, 388 f., 394-397, 465 ff.
Lower classes, solidarity of, 390
Lucianus, Biblical text of, 461
Luke, St., Gospel of, 248 f.
Lutherans, 46,
Magi, Adoration of the, 354,
Magic, 142, 453-459
Magic, language of, 301-307
Magic spells, Greek, Hebrew, Indian, Mandaean, Syrian, 304
Magic words, 255 f., 259-261
Magical books, 254-264, 284
Magical formulae, 93, 142, 255-263, 394-397, 454-459
502
Magical papyri, London, 302, 305 Magical papyrus, Paris, 254-260, 302, Magical text, Abyssinian, 336, Magician’s outfit, 263
Mammon, Jesus on, 246,
Mammon, the Gospel antagonism to,
85 Mandaean spells, 304, 305 Manumissio in ecclesia, 3223, 3303 Manumission, Christian formularies of, 3252, 329 f. ᾿ Manumission “12. the prayer,” 321, 3223 Manumission, Jewish records of, 321, 3223, 4525 Manumission, records of, 111, 320 ff. Manumission, sacral, 102, 1192, 320- 331,359, Manuscripts in jars, 34f., 343, 361
house of
448
Maps, 289, 3
Mark, St., Gospel according to, 415, 2236
Market prices, 273,
Marks of Jesus, 301
Marriages between brother and sister, 138 f., 168,
Martyrdoms (literary genre), 249, 399
Martyrs, 355 f.
Martyrs, Acts of the Alexandrian, 45,
Martyrs, Kyrios, 355
Martyrs, Scilitanian, 2523, 356
Masses, the, 7 ff., 290-300. See Lower classes
Masterbuilder, 160
Mastic, herb, 259,
Mastigia (?), 256 (1. 3009), 2594
Materialistic method of research in history, 465 ff.
Matthew, St., Gospel according to, 2235
Maximum tariff (Diocletian’s), 273 f.
Mediator, 389. See Agency, Para- clete ,
Medical terms, 90, 98,
Medical writers, 78,
Mediterranean civilisation, 2
Meeting, 112,
Meeting again after death, 303,
Meeting-house, 112,
Memnon colossus, 4353
Men, the god, 328,, 435 f.
Messiah, idea of the, 365,
Metaphors, Primitive 318 ff., 332
Method, materialistic, 465 ff.
Method, political, in study of culture, 2648
Methodists, 112,
Methods of research and interpreta- tion, 1 ff., 62 ff., 146 ff., 264 ff., 296, 2991, 301,, 349 f., 358, 384 f., 393 ff., 3961, 399 ff., 425 ff., 430 ff., 465 ff.
Middle Greek, 123
Midwives, book for, 84ς, 86,
Christian,
INDEX *
Milestones, Augustan, 65
‘Military diploma, 84, 443 ff.
Mime, fragment of a, 3365
Minister of Augustus, 376
Minister of Christ, 376
Miracles, 385 f., 466
Miracles, accounts of, 975, 284, 386,,
3991 ἢ Miracles of healing, 284 Mishna, 2, 685, 382, Missionary documents, 152 ff., 241
‘Missionary language, 300
Missionary religions, 152-161, 288 f.
Mithraic liturgy, 289,
Mithras cult, Cumont’s map, 289), 5
Model boys, 204,
Modern Greek, 39, 82, 123, 133, 440.
‘Modern ”’ souls, 300
Money devoted to religious purposes, 104 f., 153 ff., 284
Money payments, sacral, 361 f.
Monogram of Christ, 47, 2221, 2554, 280,
Monograms of archangels, 455 f.
Monograms with p, 2513, 306j9
Monotheism, 386 f.
Moral element in Christianity, 390 f.
Morality, 309 ff., 390 f.
Morality for the sake of reward, 314
Morality of the workshop, 314
Morals, ancient popular, 308-318
Moravian Hymn-book, 388,
Most Great (Hermes), 281,
Most Great gods, 352,
Most High God, 321, 416
Mother’s name in magical texts, 3064
Mothers, 167-170, 176 ff., 187-191, 192-197, 202 ff., 214 f., 315, 317, 448
Mount, Sermon on the, 266
Much laboured, 313 f.
Mummy-labels, 99
Muratorian canon, 197, 197», 1983, 249
Murder, expiation of, 415
Musical notation, early Christian, 43,
Naassenic psalm, 43
Nails, 331,
Naked soul, 292,
Name, change of, 18295
Name, in the, 62, 121
i mother’s, in magical texts, 3006
Name of daemon, important in ex- orcism, 261,
Names, double, 452,
Names in Rom. xvi., 279;
Names in the book, 119
Names, list of, 372. See Onomastica
Names of archangels, 455 f.
Names, pet, 204, 435 f.
Names, shortened, 435, 437,
Narrative style, popular, 399
Narratives of adventure, 174 f., 399
INDEX
Narratives of expiation, 399,
Narratives of rescue, 180,, 284, 307, 399
ον οὐ: of the miraculous, 97, 284, 3
Nativity, date of the, 6,
Naturalism, 63
Neck, to lay down one’s, 117 f.
Net, 388,
New English Dictionary, 46,, 225, 2628, 3010
New Testament. See Testament
‘““New Testament ” Greek, 62 ff.
“New” words, 74 ff., 171g, 20849, 2585
Nicene Creed, 3452
Nominative, 123 ff.
Nominative for genitive, 1210
Non-literary, the, x, 22, 4,1 47 ff., 228 f., 466
Non-literary memorials, 4
' Non-political character at Primitive Christianity, 338 f.
Norwegian’ investigators, 59.
Norwegians in Zululand, 29,
Note of hand, 331 ff.
“ Notes and Queries,”
Novation, 332,
Nubian language, 45
Number 616, the, 344
Number 666 (or 616), the, 276 ff.
Number 888, the, 278,
Number of languages, 2624
Numerals, distributive, 1221.
Numerals in Greek New Testament,
742, 1009, 442,
771, 5 Numerical riddles, 277 ff.
Obscenity, 164,, 276 “ Observations,” 18th-cent. compilers of, 12,, 407 Odes, 349 * Oecumenical Christian characteristics, 249 Oecumenical Christianity, xiii, 249,
3981, 409
Oftcess of the Roman army, 197- 200, 216-221
Official style, 68,
Ointment for eyes, 136,
Old English charters, 92,; glossary, 2251; gospels, 127,
Old Latin version of Bible, 127
Old Syriac version of Bible, 127
“ Olivet,” 171
Onomastica SACTA, 25949, 405 f.
Onomatology, 73
Open door, 300,
Oracle, 17511, 284
Oracular literature, 3675
Oration (literary genre), 243
Order for payment of corn, οος; of wheat, 121
Ordination, requirements for, 221 ff.
Orientalisation of the West, 2
503 of the New
“Original language ’’ Testament, 64
Orphics, 303,
Ossuaries, 6,
Ostraca, 50 ff.
Ostraca, Aramaic, 523, 4
Ostraca, Christian, from Egypt, 56,
Ostraca, Coptic, 505, 221-227
Ostraca, hieratic, 505
Ostraca in N. Europe, 532
Ostraca, inscribed with Gospel pas- sages, 56-61, 1441. 223,
Ostraca, writing scratched on, 52,
Our Lord, 351
Overseer (title of honour), 347
Ox and ass, 81, 275
Pahlavi, 32, Palmyrene inscr., 4475
_Pander, to act as, 225 f.
Papas, 205-213, 2084, 216-221
Papyri, 24 ff., 32 ff., 467
Papyri, bibliography of, 44,
Papyri, Christian, 6,, 40-48
Papyri, Coptic, 373, 44 f.
Papyri, corpus of, 40
Papyri, discoveries of, 30 ff., 36 ff.
Papyri, excavations for, 31
Papyri, Hebrew, 38,
Papyri, hieratic, 400,
Papyri, hieroglyphic, 38
Papyri, Jewish, 37, 45
Papyri, Latin, 37
Papyri, Persian, 38
Papyri, publication of, 39 ff.
Papyrus boats, 30
Papyrus codex, 30
Papyrus manufacture, ancient and modern, 27 ff.
Papyrus plant, 25 f., 30
Papyrus rolls, 28 f.
Parable of the barren fig-tree, 272,
Parable of the Good Samaritan, 134,,
272
Parable of the importunate widow, 272
Parable of the labourers in the vine- yard, 314
Parable of the prodigal son, 188, 191, 272
‘Parable of the rich fool, 294,
Parable of the unjust steward, 33, Parable of the wicked servant, 270 Parables, our Lord’s, 1347, 272 Paraclete, 87, 1224, 336 Paradise, 260, Parallelism in civilisation of Egypt and Palestine, 268 ff., 2751, 3521. Parallelism of Christian and Pagan pairs of ideas, 314 f.
Parataxis, 131-136, 1973
Parchment amulets, 59
Parchment letters, 149,
Parchments, 4, 10 f., 30, 32, 382, 415, 430 44, 451, 3635. See Vellum
504
Paris Magical Papyrus, 254-264
“ Parochia,’’ consciousness of a, 1592
Parricide and matricide, 317
Parthians, 32 ff.
Participles, use of, 19315, 19499, 210,
Parusia, 368-373. See also Epidemia, Epiphany
Parusia coins, 368, 3713, 373
Parusia crown, 369,
Parusia dues and taxes, 368 f.
Parusia, eras reckoned by, 368, 372 f.
Parusia, expenses of, 368 f., 370, 372
Parusia, manifestation of, 3704 τ
Parusia of Antichrist, 371 f.
Parusia of Antiochus the Great, 370,
Parusia of Asclepius, 370,
Parusia of G. Caesar, 3711, 372,
Parusia of Christ, 367 ff., 389
Parusia of the Emperors, 370 ff.
Parusia of Mithradates, 370,
Parusia of Nero, 3713» 5
Parusia of Ptolemies, 370,
Parusia of Saitapharnes, 370,
Parusia sacrifices, 368, 371
Parustia, the first, 3725
Parusia, the second, 372.5, 389
Parvenu, 294
Paston Letters, x
Pastor Hermae, 42, 49,
Pastoral Epistles, 238 f., 279, 300, 311, 373
Patristic Gk., 4049
Patristic MSS., 280,
Paul, the name, 443,
Paul, St., Epistles of, 157 ff., 233 ff., 391; to be learnt by heart, 223
Paul, St., his idea of freedom, 319,
Paul, St., journey to Jerusalem, 436 ff.
Paul, St., writes letters during im- ee 2371. See also Index
Pay days, 361 f.
Payments, days for effecting, 361
Payments in kind, 33,
Payments of a religious nature, 361 f.
Payments of corn, 90,4, 121
Perforation of documents, 333,
Peril of the sea, 181,
Persecutions of Christians, 46, 137, 213 ff., 342
Persian kings, letters of, 375,
Persian papyri, 38
Person, 341,
Personal execution, 269 f., 330
Personal names in Rom. xvi., 279,
Personality, a leading, "466
Personality, popular, types of, 396
Pet names, 204, 435 f.
Peter, Acts of, 42,
Peter, Epistles of, 242, 248
Peter, Second Epistle of, 317
Peter, Gospel of, 57, ~
Fetition, 369,, 370,, 372.
INDEX
Pfaffiein and Pdpstlein, 2194,
Pharaoh, 352
Pharisaism, 450
Philemon, Epistle to, 216 f., 234, 237, 279, 332, 334, 335 ἴ.
Philippians, Epistle to the, 238
Philological importance of the new texts, 62 ff. ὁ
Philologists and theologians, 394
Philosebasti, 348,
Phonetic spelling, 201, 406,
Phonology and accidence, 72 f.
Phylae, names of, 364,
Physicians, 84, 86, 89 f., 98,
Pietistic congregations, 112, .
Piety, Gentile, evidenced by the ancient shrines, 285-288
Piety, various levels of, in the ancient world, 287
Pilgrimages (literary genre), 249
Planetary inscription at Miletus, 453 ff. 3
Plough, 388,
Plougher, 388,
Pneumatic communion, 378,, 387
Poemander (Poimandres), 835, 288,
Polemics, Christian, 283
Political intent in studying culture, 264,
Politics, Primitive Christianity not interested in, 339 f.
Poll-tax, Egyptian, 271,
Poll-tax, Jewish, 355
Polygenesis, 265,
Pope, title, 208,, 219
Popes, architectural, 160
Popular character of Primitive Chris- tianity, 246 f., 385, 388 f.
Popular ethics, ancient, 308-318
Popular etymology, 25945
Popular forms of expression, 396
Popular language, 9, 22, 55, 62 ff.
Popular law, 318-337
Popular literature, 247
Popular morality, 308-318
Popular narrative style, 399
Popular personality, types of, 396
Popular religion (‘‘ folklore ”), 287
Popular scene (in comedy), 317
Popular style, 131-143
Postils, 249
Potsherds, 50 ff. See Ostraca
Praeparatio evangelica, 196
Praeparatio latina, 447
Praescript (= salutation), 48), 1515, ¢ 236
“ Praise of Wisdom,” 1375
Prayer and fasting, days of, 420
Prayer “‘ for the city,’ 458
Prayer, house of, manumission in, 321, 322,
Prayer, Lord’s, 48,, 565, 575, 391
Prayer to Isis, 753, 1419, 288,
Prayer with Thou, 141,
Prayers, 284. See Intercession
INDEX
Prayers, early Christian, 43,
Prayers for protection (Corinth), 45%; (Miletus), 453 ff.
Prayers for vengeance (Amorgus), 117
Prayers for vengeance (Rheneia), 151, 1163, 3223, 413 ff., 452,
Prepositions, 120 f.
Presbytery, 46, 337s, 3695
Presbyter, Christian, 46, 213 ff., 219
Presbyter, Jewish, 1539, 440,
Presbyter, pagan, 494, 3695
Price, 322-325, 329
Price. See Purchase money
Prices of corn, 2731
Priest, High (Christ), 365, 389
Priest of Isis, 10513, 368,
Priestling and popeling, 2199
Priests in Hellenistic Egypt, 285,
Priests, Jewish, 440,
Priests, petitions from, 1562, 361g, 368, ,
Primitive Christianity. See Chris- tianity
Primitive Church, 382,
Primitive religion, 160 f.
Principate, 350, 352 -
Problems awaiting solution, 397-409. See Research _
Processions, 106), 2, 367
Proclamation in the Jerusalem, 79 ff.
Proclamations, imperatival infinitive in, 80,
Prodigal son, 1359, 1654, 166,, 5, 187- 192, 202,4, 299
Prodigal son, parable, 188, 191, 272
Production, religious, 400
Profession, Lutheran certificates of,
Temple at
46,
Proletarian life, 169 f.
Propaganda for a cult, 17, 152 ff., 241, 251, 287, 384 f.; correspond- ence devoted to, 157 1., 241
Prophecies, -3679
Proselytes, 452
Proskynemata, 1744.
Prosopographia of the Imperial period, 290 f., 299,
Protective charm, 453 ff.
Protestant solidarity, ix
“ Protestant Weekly Letter,” ix
Proverbs-of Solomon, 44,
Proverbs, unidentified, 43,
Provincialism (?) of S.W. Asia Minor, 115,
Psalms, fragment from Oxyrhynchus,
4248 Psalms learnt by heart, 223 Psalter, fragment at Jena, 435 Psalter, fragments at Leipzig, 294 Pseudonymous letters, 233 Publicans, 269 Purchase, deeds of, 34 f. Purchase money, 333
See Sale
505
‘Purchase-money (of slaves), 322-325, 327 ff.
Purists and Hebraists, 71
Put in trust with the gospel, 374
Quakers, x,, 1123
Ransom, 327 ff.
Ready money, bought for, 324, Receipts, 110 f., 166, 331, 360 Reckoning, to make a, 117
Recommendation, letters of, 171, 197 ff., 235 Recompense, the idea of, 160f.,
413 ff., 448, 450
Reconciliation, 187. (1. 10), 188,
Reconciliation, international, ix, 3981, 409
Recto and verso, 29, 430 f.
Redeemer, cult of the, 389
Redemptio servt suis nummts, 322,
Redemption, 319-330
Redemption money, 327 ff.
Re-enslavement, 3252
Reformations, 161
Relative as interrogative, 126,
Religion and theology, 379 ff.
Religion, hedonistic, 160 f.
Religion, history and psychology of, 400
Religion, money spent on, 105, 284 f.
Helgien of the Apostles, its character, 160 f. ᾿
Religion, popular (‘‘ folklore ’’), 287
Religion, primitive, 160 f.
Religions, missionary, 288 f.
Religious atmosphere of the ancient shrines, 285 ff.
Religious culture of the Imperial period, 284 ff.
Remission, 330 f.
Repetition of an incantation, 421
Representation of one person by another, 1184, 121}4, 166,, 331 f., 3351. ,
Rescue, narratives of, 180,, 284, 307, 399
Research. See Methods
Research, international. See Ameri- can, Austrian, Belgian, British, Danish, Dutch, French, German, Greek, Italian, Norwegian, Russian, Swedish
Research, future work of, 397-409
Research, joys and sorrows of, 398,
408 f.
Research, tasks for, 441, 1679, 238, 2484, 2642, 2731, 2984, 2991, 3031 3151, 337, 3746 3864, 4062, 4372 464 xe ᾿
vesponsum divinum, 153."
Retaliation, 413 ff.
Revelation of St. John, 23, 42ς, 69, 244, 248, 313, 341, 348f., 362f., 374
506
“ Revelations,’’ apocryphal, 249, 287. Revelations by the god Sarapis, 155 Revenge, 413 ff.
Reviewers of this book, xiii, 80, 445, 1685, 2371, 3121, 3332, 3463, 3650. See also Index V: Calder
Reward (in the New Testament), 110 ff., 314
Rhythm, Asian, 70
Rich fool, the, 294,
Rich, the, 2944
Riddles, numerical, 277 ff.
Right judgment, give, 117
Righteousness, crown of, 369
Robber scene, 134
Robbers, 935, 2792, 291, 3179
Roll, of lead, 233
Roll, papyrus, 28f., 118
Rolls, Herculanean, 755, 117 f.
Romanisation of the East, 2
Romans, Epistle to the, 239 f., 276, 2791, 4371) 438
* Rosette with cross, 280,
Rosettes, 280,
Royal law, the, 362; Σ
Russian investigators, 64,. See also Index V and VI C: Latyschev
Rustic uncials, 240 "
234 ff.,
Sabaoth, 257 and 262 (1. 3052) Sacred, 375 f.
Sacrifice, idea of, 329 f.
Sacrifices, 46,, 164 f., 327, Sacrifices, advent, 368, 371 Sacrificial regulations, 284
Saints, legends of, 249 f.
Sale, contracts of, 33 ff., 163, 319-
330
Sale to the god as.trustee, 323
Salutation (in letters), 1513, 4, 166,, 171 f.
Samaritan, the good, 134,, 272
Samaritan, the grateful, 13649
Sarapis. See Serapis
“Sargon,” Grimsby trawler, 400,
Saviour, 308, 363 ff., 369 f., 389
Saviour and God, 3445, 364g
Saviour of the world, 364
Saviour of the world, idea and cult, 3641.
“Sayings and signs,’’ 386, ‘
“ Schleswig Holstein,’ German traw- ler, 400,
Scilitanian martyrs, 2523, 356
“ Scolding ”’ scene in Plautus, 317
Scriptuve, 375 f.
Scriptures, buried, 36,
Sea, peril of the, 181,
Sea voyages, 279 f.
Seal, Solomon’s, 261,
Sebaste Day, 358-361
Sebastologi, 348,
Sebastos month, 171
Secularisation of “" Biblical ’’ words,
75 ff.
INDEX
Secularisation of Jewish rites, 3222 Seduce, to, 225 f. Seleucid era, 34 Seleucidae, coins of the, 3441 Semasiology, 403 | Semasiology, religious, 2192, 408 Semeia and logia, 386, Semitic religions, 4001 Semiticisms, 691, 719, 122f., 125 f., 168,, 170,; Lord King, both Semitic and Egyptian, 352 f. Septuagint : concordance, 8798 cosmopolitan, prepared the way for Christianity, 386 dictionary, 406, Grammar, 195-7, 22, 484, 50, 73 illustrated by the ostraca, 55 influence on New _ Testament vocabulary, etc., 763, 342, 351, 3614 influence on ‘ planetary inscrip- tion ᾿ at Miletus, 458, its history illustrated by inscrip- tions from Rheneia, 15;, 233; 413 ff., 423; by other inscrip- tions, 233, 234 Jewish revision of (?), 437 lexicography, 404 f. papyrus fragments, 425, 4, @ 431; at Heidelberg, 30, 41, parallels to an Egyptian sacral text, 139f. (motes); to Paris Magical Papyrus, 2575, 260-264 (notes) parchment fragment, 43, quotations in inscriptions, 224, 234; unrecognised, 234, 461 ff. quoted in a papyrus letter, 216, substitutes Lord for Jahveh, 350
supposed “‘ Biblical’? words in, 75 ff., 81-88, 89-92, 95 f., 102, 115 f., 1251.
words and phrases: εἰς = ‘‘ for,” 171g; κύριος βασιλεύς, 3523; σῶμα, 1605, Sevaphinen, Die, Tersteegen’s, 262, Sermon on the Mount, 266 Servant, 319 Servant of Isis, 74, Servant, the wicked, 270 Shed blood, to, 417 Sh(e)ma, Hebrew papyrus, 38, Shepherd, 99 ff., 389 ~ Shepherd of Hermas, 42, 49, Shepherds, guild of, 100, Shifters-on, 266 Shortening of names, i Shrines, ancient, ther: tehaisie atmo- sphere, 285-288 ; Shrunken grammatical forms, 124 f. Shuck, dog-fiend, 225, Sibylline literature, 367, Sicarii, 355 f., 3554 Sickness, 135, 153 f., 156 ff., 307 f.
INDEX
Sign of authenticity in a letter, 166, 172
Signatures, 1679, 171 f.
“* Signs and sayings,”’ 386,
Signs of the archangels, 453 ff.
Sins, confession of, 1359, 187-192, 216,, 284
Six hundred three score and six, 276 ff.,
344 Sixtine edition of Vulgate, 127 Slave of Christ, 323 ff., 3507, 376 Slave of the Emperor, 160, 2383, 376,
441 2
Slave of Isis, 74,
Slave of the Syrian goddess, 109
Slavery for debt, 330
Slavery of God, 3254
Slavery of righteousness, 326,
Slavery of Satan, 3275
Slaves, contract for purchase of, 163,
Slaves, Imperial, 2385, 376 f.
Slaves, manumitted, not to be re- enslaved, 3252
Slaves, names of, 329,
Slaves of death, 323,
Slaves of men, 323,
Slaves of sin, 323,
Slaves of the gods, 3234
Slaves of the law, 32349
Slaves, sacral manumission of, 102, 1192, 319-330, 350,
Social history, 264 ff.
Social history, political bearing of, 2642
Social piety, 175
Social solidarity of the Christians, 213
Social structure of Primitive Chris- tianity, 7 f.
Société des Etudes Juives, xi
Society of Sacred Study, Central,
4049
Soldiers, 179-183, 186, 204,
Soldiers’ letters, 179-186, 186,, 197- 199
Soldier’s portrait, 1804,
Solidarity of the lower classes, 390
Solidarity, social, of the Christians, 212; of scattered churches, 213; of lower orders generally, 390 f.
‘Solomon, Judgment of,” 276,
Solomon, Proverbs of, 446
Solomon’s Song, 462 f.
Son of God, 346 f., 389
Son of Man, 389
Son, prodigal, 188, 272
Song of Solomon, 462 f.
Soul, naked, 292,
Soul, to humble the, 418 ff.
Soul-life of antiquity, 399
Soul-pictures, 296 ff.
Souls, ancient, 290-300
Souls, individual, 290-300
Souls, ‘‘ modern,’’ 300
Sovereign, worship of the, 289, 338 ff.
507
Sparrows, market price of, 272-275
“ Spectator, The,’’ 313,
Spelling, phonetic, 201, 406,
Spells, 304. See Magic
Standard of learning among the clergy, 221-224
Stanza d’Eliodoro, 61,
Statenbijbel, 127,
Statistics of the New Testament vocabulary, 76 ff.
Steersman, 397, 400,
Stone, inscriptions on, 11
Student Christian Federation, xiv,
Style, epistolary, 241
Style, epistolary, preterite of, 1714, 1763
Style, Johannine, 131-141
Style, of edicts, 80,
Style of New Testament and of pro- fane texts compared, 123-140
Style of St. John’s Prologue, 123
Style, official, 68,
Style, popular, 131-143
Style, popular narrative, 399
Style, solemn, in sacral use, 136-142
Style, stately, use of “I,” 133, 136-
143 Sufferings of Christ, 96,
“ Suicide threatened, 202 (ll. 14, 15),
2024, 204
Sun-child (Sunday child), 92
Sunday, 3572, 359 ff.
Sunday School Union, 128,
Sundial, 2810
Sureties, 222, 223, 3233
Swedish investigators. See Index V: Aurelius, Lagercrantz, Nachman- son, Rudberg
Swedish peasant vocabulary, 247,
Swedish version of Paulus, 241,
Symbols, supposed planetary, 454 ff.
Synagogue of the Libertines, 441
Synagogue, ruler of, 440
Synagogues, inscriptions for, 344, 439 ff.
Syncretism, 264
Synoptic gospels, 69, 248
Syntax of the New Testament, 119- 125
Syriac, 2,
Syrian goddess, 109 f., 350
Syrian magic, 304
16,
Tabernacles, Feast of, 115 f.
Table of devils, 351
Table of the Lord, 351
Tablets, cursing, 22,, 233, 94 f., 284, 3028.
Tablets, gold, 11, 303,
Tablets of wax, II, 503
Tablets, wooden, 505, 99 f., 124, 442 ff.
Talmud, borrowed words in, 93, 941, 18295
Talmuds, the, 2, 104, 2751
Tanaim, 382,
508
Tariff, Diocletian’s Maximum, 273 f. Tattoo marks, Arab, 4553
Tax, on aliens, 11I,
Tax, bath and embankment, 360 Taxation, Egyptian, 54, 3393
Taxation,. enrolment for, 270f. Temenos, 153 f. Temple at Jerusalem, warning
notice, 8o ff. , Temple, building of a, 153 £.; temple accounts, 3533
Temple choirs, 287
Temple furniture, 102
Temple laws, 284
Temples, xv, 284 f., 286
Tents erected at festivals, 115,
Terracottas, Egypto-Greek, 288,
‘Testament, 3193, 337
Testament (or will), 834, 90, 2214, 3193, 3241, 337
Testament, New: essential characteristics, 143 ff.,
250 f., 282, 391 f., 400 f., 409 its earliest history, 49 legal ideas in, 335 ff. meanings of words, 107-116 “ original language ’’ of, 64 peculiar beauty of, 72 statistics of its vocabulary, 76 ff. style compared with that of pro- fane texts, 131-143 syntax of, 119-131 text of, 573, 461 translators, 127
Testament, Old. See Septuagint
Thanks to God, formulae of, 180,
Theatre at Ephesus, 113 f., 281,
Theatre at Miletus, 451 f., 453 ff.
Theatre-going, 1331, 452
Theologians and philologists, 394
Theologise, 3494
Theologos, 348 f., 379
Theology distinct from religion, 379
Therapeutae, 255,
Thesaurus Graecae Linguae, 403; quoted, 190, 2095, 2192, 2244, 259», 3492, 3655, 3787 433.
Thesaurus Linguae Latinae, 494 2. .
Thessalonians, Epistles to the, 237
Things that ye will, do the, 3241. .
Thorn in the flesh, 307
Thou-prayer, 1419
Throne of Satan, 281,
Through Christ, 12116, 337
This saith, 375
“Times, The,’’ quoted, 415, 168,, 3684, 400 4421 ΗΝ '
Titles used in Christian devotion, 388 f.
Token, 166,, 171
“ Tokens ” for communicants, 46,
Tombs, desecrators of, 114, 227;
Tombs, inscriptions on, 6,, 294 f., 309 f., 312 ., 315, 447 ff
402,
INDEX
Tombstones, hands on, 414 ff.
Tongue bound, 304-307 °
Tongues, the number of, 262,
“ Toparchy,” 1731
Topography, Egyptian, 45
Torah rolls, interred, 36,
Towns, great. See Cities
Towns, provincial, life in, 267 ff., 278
Tracts (tractates), 249
Trade societies, Roman, 390,. See Guilds :
Transcriptions in the New Testa- ment, Semitic and Latin, 77
Transfer (to another person’s ac-
᾿ count), 121
Translation, principles of, x, 426,
Translators of N.T., 127
Travellers’ tales of adventure, 399
Tribute of 2 drachmae, 269
Trio of daemons, 261}.
Trust, committed to my, 374
Twin-sisters, 124,
Two and two, by, 122 f. j
Types of ancient soul-life, 292-299
Types of popular personality, 396
Uncials, rustic, 240
Universal Greek, 22, 62 ff. “Unknown Warrior,’ 442,
Upper classes, 7,, 246 f., 338 f., 466 ἢ. Urkunde, Ur-Kunde, 241,
Vellum, 42). See Parchment
Versammlung, 112,
Verso and recto, 29, 430
Veterans of the Jerusalem campaign, 442-446
Vetus Itala, 127
Viaticum, 179 f., 181, 182 .
Vicarious present activity of Christ, 329, 336, 382 f.
Vices, lists of, 1644, 3194
Vices and virtues, 316 ff.
Village-life, 267
Village-priest, 219,
Vine (Christ), 389
Vineyard, parable of the labourers in the, 314
Vineyard, sale of, 33 ff.
Violence, personal, 134 f., 196
‘Virtues, lists οἱ, 86,
Virtues and vices, lists of, 314~318
Visions, accounts of, 399
Vlachs, 100,
Vocabulary, 74-119
Vocabulary, labourer’s, 247
Vocabulary, New Testament, statis- tics of, 76 ff.
Vowels, rows of, 454 ff.
Vows, 158, 435 f.
Vulgar Greek, 167 f., 188,, 201 f,
Vulgar Latin, 133, 1345, 197 ff., 249
Vulgar use of cases, 122, 18449
Vulgarisms, 124, 18049
Vulgate,127, 3245, 376
INDEX
. Wage-paying, 361
Wages (in the New Testament), 10g ff., 314
War Relief Fund, ix,
War, the Great (1914-18), ix, 245,
War, the Great, disturbs international communication, 4405
Warning notice in the Temple at Jerusalem, 79 ff
Warrantors, 222 ff., 3235
Warrior, the Unknown, 442,
Washings, ritual, 440,
Watch beds, to, 222 f.
Wax tablets, 11, 50,
Way, The (title of Christ), 389
Weiterschieber, 266,
Wheat, Corn of (title of Christ), 389
Wheat, order for payment of, 90.4, 121
Wicked servant, the, 270
Widow, the importunate, 134,, 272
Widows, itinerant, 109,
“ Wisdom, Praise οἵ, 1373
With Christ, 3031 "
Witness (Christ), 389
Witnesses, 33 f., 443-446
Witnesses, threefold, to documents, 332) 4
Wizardry, 142. See Magic
Wochenbrief, Evangelischer, ix
Womanhood, ideal of, 314 f., 450
Wooden tablets, 505, 99f., 124, 442 ff.
599
Word-formation, 73
Word of God (Christ), 389
Words becoming indeclinable, 123
Words, borrowed, 77, 93, 941, 18296
Words, Christian new formations, 78
Words, magic, 255 f., 259-261
Words, meanings of, in New Testa- ment, 107-116
Words, ‘‘ new,” 258,
Words of consolation, 415, 405 f.
74 ff., 171, 20819,
“Words of power,” 25919. See Charms ᾿
Words, statistics of New Testament, 76 ff.
Work, 312 ff.
Workmen’s sayings, 312 ff. Workshop language, 312 ff. Workshop morality, 314
World, literature for the, 249 f. World, Saviour of the, 364
World, the ancient, 282 ff. World-centres (great cities), 246 Worship, 1. See Cult
Worship, ancient places of, 285 ff. Worship of local gods, 1844 Writing, ignorance of, 924, 1667, 196, Writings, 375 f.
Writings, divine, 348, 376 Wiirttemberg Bible Institute, 144,
Yezidis, 1375
V.—MODERN PERSONS
Achelis, H., 280,
Albertz, M., 147,
Alexander, W. L., 68,
Allen, ὟΝ. C., 4910
Alt, A., 146
Amherst of Hackney, Lord, xvii, 40), 42, 86, 205,
Anderson, J. G. C., 153
A[net], H., 25.
Angus, S., 103, 634
Anrich, G., 56,4
Anz, H., 19;
Arnim, H. von, 336,
Arnold, E. V., 390,
Audollent, A., 955
Aurelius, E., 10,
Bachmann, W., 146
Baedeker, K., 253, 100,
Baldensperger, W., 32
Bardenhewer, O., 463, 232,
Barnardo, T. J., 513
Bartlet, J. V., 427
Baudissin, Count W., 11,, 74,
Bauer, W., 4075
Baunack, J., 82.
Baur, F. C., 395,
Baur, W., 234,
Bechtel, F., 98,
Becker, C. H., 38,4
‘Becker, E., 2763, 338,
Bees (Bens), N. A., 16, 185, 100g, 1637, 30611, 4392, 447, 4473
Behm, J., 338;
Behmen, Jacob, 381,
Bekker, I., 122,
Bell, H. I., xi, 385, 45s, 392, 56,» 1759, 18143, 1925, 196,,2, 204, 215g, 2707, 2716, 4040
Benndorf, O., 134, 171
Bergh van Eysinga, G. A. van den, 7. 2315
Bergmann, J., 413.
Biedermann, E., 369,
Birt, Th., 272
Bissing, Baron F. W. von, 358,
Blake, W. T., 17410
Blass, F., 371, 981, 126 his Grammar quoted, 207, 764, 946,
ΠΟ, 11Qg, 120g, 4, 1224, 1234, 1244, 120,5, 1704, 18044, 1855, 1887, 28 Debrunner’s edition quoted, 126,
2 pace ἃ believer in ‘ New Testa- ment *’ Greek, 623, 68,
Blass, F., on St. Paul and the Asian rhythm, 70,
on the bad boy Theon’s letter,
855, 201, 2014, 9, 20293, 2037,
3971.
Blau, L. 254 10), 235, 341, 415 53: 941, 120,, 18296, 2551» 275) 306g, 3246, 4215
Bleckmann, F., 5.» 3534
Blouet, A., 413s
Bludau, A., 412, 452, 462, 572s
Blumenthal, F., 3431, 345. 36410
Bockh, A., 12, 455
Bodelschwingh, F. von, 51,
Boehmer, J., 62, ᾿
Bohl, E., 235
Boéhme, Jakob, 381,
Boisacq, E., 4035
Boissonade de Fontarabie, 3492, 4333
Boll, F., 1423, 333, 4534, 455, 455s 4565
Bonnet, M., 1245, 1375
Borchardt, L., 25,, 293
Bormann, E., 37649, 4492, 4501
Bouriant, U., 57
Bousset, W., 355, 57a, 93s, 2394 2441, 3497, 4565, 4572
Brandt, S., 280,, 3051, 3633
Breccia, E., 1495, 2953, 4424
Brightman, F. E.,’ 306,
Brinkmann, A., 1244
Broéndsted, G., 205,
Brooke,. A. E., 42,
Bruce, J. C., 4474
Brueckner, A., 52,
Brugmann, K., 132, 1324, 133, 4031
Briinnow, R. E., 14,
Bruns, C. G., 843, 166,
Brunton, G., 44,
Biichmann, G., 3010
Buckler, W. H., 2815, 328,
Budge, Sir E. A. W., 44,
Buecheler, F., 465, 278, 316,
Bulle, H., 4,
ἘΒΌΠΒΙΝΙ E., 10,
uresch, K., 14,, 328,,
Bore. Ὁ οὗν 41) 3251, 3905
Burkitt, F. C., 38,
Burton, E. de Witt, 49
Bussemaker, U. C., 89,5
Butler, H. C., 15,
Buttmann, Α., 132,
Byron, 2930
3592
J.-F,
510
INDEX
Cagnat, R., 185, 1495, 1803, 3535) 3745
Calder, W. M., xix, 60, 131, 269,, 2804, 3281, 4369.
Calderini, A., 2321, 3203, 3255, 3296
Calmus, 350
Carlyle, T., xix f., 1431, 3043
_Chabert, 5, ω 12.
Chandler, R. (1738-1810), IOI
Cichorius, C., 14,
Clemen, C., 2645
Clemen, P., 14,
Clermont-Ganneau, C. 5. (1846-1923), 80, 4392, 461;
Cobern, C. M., 10, 144, 155, 167
Cohen, H., 341, 2751
Cohen, H. (numismatist), 371s
Cohn, L., 403,
Cohn. See Conrat.
Collignon, M., 133
Collitz, H., 825, 98,
Conrat (Cohn), M., 318,
Cooley, A. S., 16,
aan ἐ B., 225, 2274
Cowley, A 1324, 372 Cox, C. W. Ν᾽ 6 (Fig. 2) Craig, C., 1252
Cremer, H., 213, 75, 79, 853, 92}, 924 947 954, 975, 98, 985, 991, TOT, IOI y-4; 102), 1039, 107, 1135.»
, 18818, 3681, 3753, 385, 4°78
Crénert, W., 509, 759, 118, 1502, 1513» 1521, 1977, 2143, 4935
Crum, W. E., 50, 553, 57, 2092, 219», 2219, 3, 2229), 2231, 4-10) 2241) 2» 225, 2255, υ, 2351, 300,
Crusius, O.,
Cumont, F., 11,, 153, 232, 363, 265, 2885, 289), 3» 3782, 3791 416,
4534
Currie, M. A., 2314
Curtis, T. E. H., 131,
Curtis, ὟΝ. A., 413, 345:
Curtius, E., 3203, 321, 3229, 3245, @ 3252, 3262, 3
Dalman, G., 4391, 2 Dante, 390 Daremberg, C., 8919 ‘Daumet, H., 145, 326, Debrunner, A., 207, 119g, 126, 126g, 20713) 2586, 3323 Decke, 10, Deissmann, G. A.: biographical details, 3,, 542, 147) 3464, 408, ἐς Deissmannism, *” 683 portrait, 61, De la Rue, C. and C. V., 4375 Delehaye, H., 2192, 2771, 37512 Delitzsch, Franz (1850-1922), 313¢ Dessau, H., 69, 291, 3592, 447s Deubner, L., 1134, 292, Dibelius, F., 338, Dickens, C., 262, TDiiebane ©
ann
511
Diehl, E., 239, 464, Diels, H., 175, 109,, 1244, 1424, I715, 1755) 20712, 3931, 402, 40 Dieterich, Albrecht : foe a es in comparative religion, 2659 his ‘Abraxas, 255,, 259% 261g, 14, 262 Leyden Magical Papyrus, 1373 Nekyta, 2879, 315s on the adoration of the Magi, 3545 on letter of Psenosiris, 465 on letters from Heaven, 245 on magical texts, 254, 2552, 2597 on Mithras, 1373, 2192, 2893 on religious character of Primi- tive Christianity, 379, Dieterich, Karl, 7,, 2211, 73, 1232 IQ0g5, 202 Dieterich’sche “Verlagsbuchhandlung, Figures 47, 54, 72 Dittenberger, W., Orvtentis Gr. Inser. Sel., 172, 793, 805, @ 814, 99)» TOIg, 1144, 116, 137, 1749, 197, 2179, 2793, 3942, 3173, 3241 34524 3525 3531 ike 36410, 3064, 3684, 37510, 378 ἢ Sylloge, 234, 250, 826, ὅσο, 10, 8758, 885, 965, 106,, 8, 1116, 135}, 1372 150,, 152,, 18045, 308,, 3111, 320g, 3213, 3231, 3263, 3411, 3448, 3544 3703, 4, ὦ 376s, 5» 4132, 419s, 420, 4223. See also Index VI. c. Dobschitz, E. von, Χ,, 31, 3%) 452:
260.¢,
1319
Dilger, F. 7., 3332, 338s
Domaszewski, A. von, 1844, 1975, 2894
Donaldson, Si: γάμου, ὑὸς
Dérpfeld, W., xvi, 2813
Drachmann, A. B., 3203
Dragendorff, H., 14,
Drerup, E., ὅδ
Dibner, 7Ὲ 3705
Ducange, C. D. 2244
Duhn, F. von, xvi, 614, 275» 2804, 393
Direr, Albrecht, 144, 248,
Durham, D. B., 1331
Dussaud, R., 11,
Dyke, H. van, 413
Dziatzko, K., 272, 146, 166,
14 1811},
Earle, J 926
Ebeling, H., 407,
Ebers, G., 275
Edgar, C. C., xi, 152g, 1551 157, 162}, 1635, 6, 4491
Edie, W., 254
Eger, O., 119;, 318 3191, 33214
3381, 3392
Egger, A. E., 562
Eisenmenger, J. A., 420,
Eisner, L., 1679 !
Eitrem, 5., 591
512
Erman, A., 243, 1372, 1495, 180,, 184, Erman, H., 110,
Eucken, R. (1846-1926), x, Euthymius, 128,
Evelyn White, H. G., 441, 425. Evstratiadis, S.,-137,, 4975
Exler, F. X. J., 1509
Eyssenhardt, F., 170.
Fabricius, E., 135
Feine, P., 329,
Ferguson, ὟΝ. D., 224, 318,
Ferrari, G., 3255, 3295
Fiebig, P., 685, 386, 3974
Field, F., 98,
Fincke, A., 356,
Fischer, L., 34,
Fleck, 4577
Fleckeisen, A., 1373
Fossey, Ch., 109,
Foucart, G., 3245
Foucart, P., 3203, 326,
Fraenkel, E., 89,
Frankel, M., 133, 874, 3491
Franchi de’ Cavalieri, P., 463
Frank, R., 1373 ᾿
Frederick, Prince of Wales, son of George II., 23
Frederick the Great, 325,
Fredrich, C., 13, 8
Freer, Charles L., of Detroit, 420
Freese, J. H., 28249
Freiesleben, C. F., 318,
Fricke, G. A.,.1053
Frickenhaus, A., 451, 4532, 4544
Fridrichsen, A., 59,
Friedlaender, L., 2034, 38249
Frommberger, W., 10,
Gaisford, T., 126, Gans, von, 130 Ganszyniec (Ganschinietz), R., 3454,
351% Gardiner, A. H., 50, Gardner, E. A., 18,, 286,, 2939 Gau, F.C., 514 Gebhardt, O., 43, Geffcken, J., 169, Gehrich, G., 2895 Gensichen, J., 23, George II., King of England, 2, Gerhard, G. A., 1513, 232, Gerkan, A. v., 144 Gernet, L., 89, Geuthner, P., 439, Ghedini, G., 47, 1509 Gibbon, Edward, 466 Giesecke and Devrient, 166, Glaue, P., 385, 430 Gleye, C. E., 2244, 2561, 300, Glubokowsky, N. N., 64, Goethe, 390 Goldsmith, O., 442, Goodspeed, E. J., 1764, 219; Gough,’A, B., 28245
INDEX
Gradenwitz, me 3242, 331g, 3322, » 3397 305, |
Grafiited, M. C, de, 61,
Grégoire, H., 153, 2697, 4641
Gregory, C. R., 271, 41g, 5, 572
Grenfell, B. P., and Α. 5. Hunt:
Biblical and early Christian frag- ments discovered by, 41 ff.
diacritical marks employed by, xxi
excavations by, 31 _
libelli published by, 46,
opinions and editorial comments, 371, 866, 1235, 1742, 5 41 6, 1984, 1991, 2073, 2086, 2143, 4, 21715, 271, 3342 |
papyri published by them dis- cussed and printed in full, 164 ff., 167 ff., 172 ff., 176 ff., 197 ff., 201 ff:, 205 ff., 213 ff., 425 ff., 430 ff.
translations by, x, 426,
See also Index VI.p: Ambherst, Fayim, Grenfell, Hibeh, Oxy- rhynchus, Tebtunis.
Grenfell, Hunt, and Goodspeed, 219,
Gressmann, H., 1637, 245,
Grieve, A., 20
Griffith, F. Ll., 45,
Grillparzer, F., 230,
Grimm, C. L. W., 752, 77, 782, 84, 845, 891, 9, 961, 97, 117, 3085, 407
Grotius, H., 332,
Gruppe, O., 14043
Griitzmacher, G., 2353
Grynaeus, J. J., 31,
Gunkel, H., 1471» 2423, 244, 2643
Guthe, H., 265, 303, 1624, 163,
Haberlin, C., 24,
Habershon, A. R., 388,
Hackel, E., 733
Hahn, L., 2,
Haldane, Viscount, x,
Hall, H. R., 26, 505
Halliday, W. R., 25949
Halm, K., 166,
Halmel, A., 318,
Harnack, A., x1, 89, 19, 433, 2659 Chronologie d. altchy. Lit., 413, 479 Dogmengeschichte, 362,
“ Festgabe ’’ for, 435
Geschichte d. altchr. Lit., 232,
Militia Christi, 18299, 221,
Mission . . . des Christentums, 80, 2769, 2795, 2891, 3
on “ epistles,’’ 229,
on the calendar inscription of Priene, 366, 2
on the Epistle of Theonas to Lucianus, 2329
on the letter of Psenosiris, 47,
on the Logia, 44,, 426,
on the oldest (?) Christian letter, 471, 2061, 2084, 20919, 210,, 213
OD πάπας, 2084, 2192
INDEX
Harnack, A., on πολλαπολλων, 1685 on Pompeian inscriptions, 276, on ‘‘ Saviour,’’ 364, on uncanonical gospels, 429
Haro, Madam de, 28
Harris, J. R., 495, 1294, 206
Hastings, J., 243, 591, 3382
Hatch, E., 18
Hatch, W. H. P., 223, 755, 876, 3117
3315, 3497 357s, 3782
Hatzidakis, G. N. (Athens), 2219, 883,
19098 Hatzidakis, Dr. (Crete), 280, Haupt, E., 3331 Hauschildt, H., 49 Haussoullier, B., 15. Havet, L., 894 Hay, J., 300, Head, B. V., 3454 Heberdey, R., 17, 104), 2034, 2945,
Heidel, W. A., 348,
Heinen, H., 3385
Heinevetter, F., 223, 303,
Heinrici, G., 3, 31, 81, 193, 294 435 1471, 2474, 2649, 2652, 266), 2879,
| 3104, 386, 3911, 4063, 417
Heitmiiller, W., 493, 1212, 3, 1319
Helbing, R., 196, 245, 50, 73, 1495, 1641, 168, 1763, 1802, 1873, 201,,
"2136
Helm, K., 38,
Hepding, H., 289,
Hepp, V., 146, -
Hercher, R., 977, 1667, 1774, 1785, 1015, 228, 2311, 2, 2352, 296,
Herrmann, M., 442,
Herwegen, I., 342,
Herwerden, H. van, 817, 82,, 83, 8»
84g, 875, 883, 915, 971, TOTg,
1025, 4034
Herzfeld, E., 323
Herzog, R., 143, 2153, 280,, 2942, 2951 5 3214, 3274, 3454, 3711
~ 3774 Hesseling, Ὁ. C., 642, 66, δὲς Heuzey, L., 145, 326, Hicks, E. L., 122, 131, 149, 184, g, 80,4, 3117, 3214, 3274, 3454 371 Hicks-Beach, Sir M., 3010 os Hill, G. F., 18, Hiller von Gaertringen,. Baron F., 12g, 8, 13a) 5» 142, 8, 158, 173, 233, , 984, 1034, 137, 3216, 3411, 422 Hirschfeld, G., ΟἹ, 113, Hirschfeld, O., 3454, 4151, 422 Hitzig, F., 35 Hodgkin, T., 448 Hoffmann, O., 1025 Hoffmann von Fallersleben, A. H. 169, Hohl, E., 292; Hohlwein, N., 243, 501
513
Holl, K., 65), 3459
Holleaux, M., 151, 614, 423; Hollmann, G.,.2423
Hélscher, G., 522
Holtzmann, H. J. (1832-1910), 264, Homolle, Th., 15,, 1172, 422 Hoskyns-Abrahall, J., 254 Howard, ὟΝ. F., 205
Huber, K., 126,
Huelsen, Chr., 316,
Humann, C. [K.}, 141, 4 3633 Hunt, A.S., 176,, 201. See Grenfell. Hupka, J., 3352
Ibscher, H., 28 ᾿ Ilberg, J., 783, 84ς, 86,, 307. Imelmann, J., 511, 312, Immisch, O., 292, 3685 Iverach, J., 338,
Jalabert, L., 19, 191, 232
James, M. R., 415, « 420, 137s, 388), 3975, 4251) 4335
anell, W., 119, 3235
annaris, A. N., 126
erusalem, W., 3093
espersen, O., 2472
ohnson, S., 230,
Jones, H. S., 403,
ordan, H., 147, 386,
ouguet, P., 245, 463, 57, 4040
udeich, W., 141, 909, 914
iilicher, A., 2394
lirges, P., 122
uster, J., 192, 2893). 3204, 3217, 3401, 3442, 4231
Kaftan, J., 380, Kaibel, G., 91g, 4, 1425 Kalinka, E.,-17,, 2034, 2051, 2065, 20910) 11) 21049, 3129 Kalliupolita, M., 127, Kalthoff, A., 3951 Karo, G., 144 Kattenbusch, F., 3422, 3492 Katz, R., 36, ; Kaufmann, D., 3065, 4162 Kautsky, K., 3952, 465 ff. Kautzsch, E., 35; Kavvadias, P., 16, Kawerau, G., 139 Kehrer, H., 280, Keil, J., 171, 2815, 3112, 3491 4522 Kekule von Stradonitz, R., 1398 Kennedy, H. A. A., 193, 76, 772 782 82), 1024, 338, Kent, C. F., 1253 Kenyon, Sir F. G., 254, 36412 Greek Papyri in the British Museum, 832, 935 1375, 2184, 3025, 4561 4571; extracts discussed, 142, 216 ff. on age of papyri, 26 on manufacture of papyrus, 27 on Menas ostraca, 56,
514
Kenyon, Sir F.G., on size of papyri, 29 on wooden tablets, 333. Palaeography of Greek Papyri, 264,
273, 292, 301 ᾿ τα Papyri,’”’ in Hastings’ Dict., 243,
41
Kenyon, F. G., and Η. I. Bell:
Greek Papyrii in the British Museum,
235,; extracts discussed, 174 ff., 2707, 271
Kern, O., 134, 1063
Kiessling, E., 403,
Kilgour, R., 1445
Kingsley, Charles, 38,
Kirchmaier, G. W., 318,
Kirchner, J., 173
Kirchner, V. G., 2459, 3671
Kittel, R., 522
Kitto, J., 683
Klebs, E., 291, 291,
Klein, S., 4392
Klostermann, E., 413, 4, 1282, 3, 1291, 2529
Kluge, R., 3333
Knackfuss, H., 134
Knopf, R., 563, 636, 2523, 3563
Kober, F., 2243, 2271
Koch, H., 8,, 415, 1985, 3491
Koelling, W., 124,
Koerte, A., 87;, 3365
Kégel, J., 212, 4073
KGhler, W., 2452, 3053
Konig, E., 427,
Kénnecke, 100,
Konstantinidis, A., 403,
Kopp, U. F., 457s
Kornemann, E., 288,, 3423, 3715
Kosch, W., 396,
Krauss, S., 3136
Krebs, F., 243, 462, 1495, 1715, 180,, 1841, 18541, 187;
Kretschmer, P., 883, 894, 404
Kroll, W., 783, 869, 901, 952, 1692, 3652, 4534
ag rae G., 591
Kriger, G., 1471
Krumbacher, K., 664, 1774, 404s
Kuhring, Gu. (Ww 504, 120.
Kukula, R. C., 146,
Kummer, G., 135
Lafoscade, L., 1495, 3751» 5» ἃ» 4» 6
Lagarde, P. de, 256,, 463
Lagercrantz, O., 130, 1324
Lagrange, M. J., 2391, 3095
Lambertz, M., 225,
Lanckoronski, Count K., 17,
Landau, A., 149.
Landolina, F. S., 28
Larfeld, W., 11g, 121, 139, 16,, 18,
Latyschev, B., 152, 883, 102,, 3104,
3217, 3624, 3637, 3754, 3786
Laudien, A., 243, 1493, 168, 172s, "2014
Laum, B., 285,
INDEX
Le Bas, P., 4133, 417, 421, 422, Le Bas-Waddington, 376,
Le Blant, E., 100), 7
Leemans, C., 1246
Lees, H. C., 3202
Lefebvre, ΕΝ 232 57, 571, 58, 60, 1764, 4331) 442 ὩΣ Leipoldt, J., 443, 3782
Lembert, R., 386, Leonhard, τι 305. Lepsius, R., 2179, 4353 Leroux, E., 100 (Fig. 10)
Lesquier, J., 4429, 443, 4446 89 Letronne, J. A., 1664 Lewald, H., 270,
Leyen, ἘΠῚ ν. de er, 7.
Liddell, H. 6., and R. Scott, 769, 790, ᾿ς 814, 897, 1424, 20713, 3233, 4935 Lidzbarski, M., 145, 372, 523 74a
1215, 3045, 363 Lietzmann, H., 3,
Dey Weltheiland, 3645
Handbuch zum Neuen Testament, 215, 49, 1283, 3497, 3522, 3563; on Romans and 1 Cor., 215, 49; on Romans, 86,4, 931, 315 3165; on 1 Cor., 324,
Kleine Terte: Ε ae s ‘‘ Wundergeschichten,”’
386, te Gricbhische Papyri,’’ 259, 499» 167;, 1685, 1697, 1809,, 1879, 2014, 213, Olivieri’s “ ‘Lamellae Orphicae,”
3526 Staerk’s
den,’’ 37. Swete’s “ Evangelienfragmente,”’
“ Aramaeische Urkun-
429 Wiinsch’s “‘ Antike Fluchtafeln,”’ 233, 3029 on Jena Papyri, 43,, 5, 483 on Theodotus inscription, 4401, 4, 5, 4414 Studien und Kritiken, 366, Lightfoot, J. B., 18, 71, Link, G., 37512 Linke, 1055 Lipsius, K. H. A., 18, Lipsius, R. A., 18, Lisco, H., 237, Littmann, E., 159, 2991 Lobwasser, A., 143 Loch, E., 203, Lohmann, E., xx Lohmeyer, E. Sin hi Lohr, Ἐς nae. » 33°. @ 3952 Lohr, M., 4165 Loman, ‘A. Dz, 2315 Lorimer, ὟΝ. L., 68, Low, I., 3065, 416, Lowe, H., 440 Lucas, H., τοῖς, 461, 462, 463 Lueken, W., 4575, 4591 Luschan, F. von, 17,
4392
INDEX
Luther, 127), 143,, 161, 2314, 2855,
3045, 3199, 3242, 396 Lyon, D. G., 52,
Maas, P., 217, Maass, E., 454, McCabe, J., 394: MacCarthy, J., 742 McCormick, Τὶ J., 2895 McCown, C. C., 4577 McKenzie, R., 403, McLean, N., 42, Macpherson, J., 3535 Macridy, Th., 321 Madden, F. W., 2522 Magie, D., 15g, 1124, 3432 3475, 362,, 3645, 3661, 3741) 5, 3775» 5 Magnus, L. A., 28249 Mahaffy, J. P., 409, 2356 Mangey, T., 4524 Marbe, K., 2652 Marmorstein, A., 420, 4392 Marshall, F. H., 132 Martens, L., 1169, 310, Martin, Ὁ. (οἱ Utrecht,1639-1721), 127, Martin, V. (of Geneva), 4040 Maspéro, J., 3731 Matthaei, A., 1914 Maurenbrecher, M., 80 Mayer, Eugen, 235, Mayser, E., 405, 50,, 663, 684, 832» 9» 11» 96, 1041, 1054, 1105, 12144, 1245 Meecham, H. G., 4911 Mehmet, mollah, 312, Meillet, A., 231 Meinertz, M., 420, Meister, R., 199, 732 Meisterhans, K., 22, Mendel, G., 113¢ Mendelssohn Bartholdy, G., 325 Menge, H., 4033 Menzies, A., 254 Mercati, G., 461, Merivale, C., 2939 Merk, A., 479, 2148 Merx, A., 274 Meyer, Eduard, 26., 372 -Meyer, Ernst, 2944 Meyer, H. A. W., 355) 93a 1171 3331 Meyer, P. M., xi Giessen Papyri, 2184, 2715 Griechische Texte, 51,, I10,,3, IIIy, 5, 121g, 6:14 1844, 1864, 200g, 2049, 3542 3555 6 360,, 3650 Hamburg Papyri, 823, 1025, 3659 Juristische Papyri, 243, 33, 493 libelli, 464 on diptych of veteran, 4429, 443, 44410 12 445: 2 ON πάπας, 2185 Meyer, R. M., 265, Michaelis, A., 41 Michaelis, W., 1241, 1251, 4183 Michel, Ch., 18, 859, 1144 Michelsen, J. H. A., 413, ὦ 4251
‘
515
Migne, J. P., 1264, 198,, 388,, Milligan, G.: ἐν ἀν Aon
articles by, 259, 462, 187,
Commentary on Thessalonians, 224, 368,, 3734
Here and Theve among the Papyvi, 243
lexical notes in the Expositor. See Moulton.
postcard, 182,,
Selections from the Greek Papyri, 25q 1500, 1671, 1742, 1765, 4, 1809, 15, 1872, 1904, 201,, 2136, 2154, 2104, 271,
The New Testament Documents, 491;
Vocabulary of the Greek Testament. See Moulton.
Milne, J. G., 505
Milton, J., 138,
Minns, E. H., xi, 33, οὐδ», Ὡς Minns, Miss, 34, Sel Misch, G., 147;
Mispoulet, 442,
Mitteis, L., 119,
articles by, 331, 2694, 2701, 33%
Aus den gr. Papyrusurkunden, 244
Grundztige und Chyrestomathie, 25 , 33s, 403, 2604, 2701, 3381
Leipzig papyri published by, 834, QI, 100, -
Reichsrecht und Volksvecht, 1692, 270;, 28219, 3203, 3223, 4, 3246, 3265, 3281, 2, 3306, 3312, 3306
Moffatt, J., 429, 88,, 1284, 18299, 2893
Moller, G., 505, 130
Mommsen, Theodor, 12, 55, 793, 843, 2382, 2741, 28249, 3182, 3392 366, 3707, 377s
Mommsen, Tycho, 1439, 3031
Mondini, M., 232, /
Montfaucon, B. de, 25,, 433
Montgomery, J. A., 457s
Morgan, J. Pierpont, 40,
Morike, E., 3951
Morinus, Jo., 2254
Moritz, 358,
Morth, F., 3625
Moulton, J.-H., 1073, 1163
articles by, 259, 634, 1604 -
From Egyptian Rubbish Heaps, 259
Grammar of New Testament Greek, 20,4, 63, 713, 883, 110,2, 120, 1245, 19 1263, 2695
inaugural lecture, 20,
notes in the Expositor, 485, 634, 839, 864, 5, 987, 1054, 1173
notes in the Expository Times, 2719, 2956 3995
Sowiton J.H.,andG. Milligan: ,
lexical notes in the Expositor, 491, 805, 855, 89g, 1105, 1205, 1667, 3117, 3323, 337s 3381
Vocabulary of the Greek Testament, 214, 491, 763, 817, 824, 836, 84a, 857 89,4, 912, 931 955, 1043» T10, 3379, 3971) 4934
516
Mueller, B., 2693
Miiller, F. Max, 247,
Miller, Herm., 415, 497
Miller, Nikolaus, 16,, , 449 4419. 447, 4472
Miinsterberg, R., 305,
Minter, F., 12,, 18
Muntz, W. S., 318,
_Miinz, 227,
Muscio, 84,
Musset, A. de, 300,
18,, 100g,
Naber, J. C., 341, Nachmanson, E., 225, 95g, 1143, 188,
Nageli, Th., 20,4, 635, 70 853, 5 856) a 865, 802, 4,5 9% 931 956: 966, 982
Naro, G., 28
Nash, 38,
Naumann, F., 7;, 2292 :
Nestle, E. (1851-1913), 233, 254, 27a 296, 591, 1091, 2765, 3124
Neumann, C., 1445, 248.
Newton, Sir C. T., 13,
Newton, John, 388, ‘
Nicole, J., 8182, 838, 2185, 2355 4°34
Nielsen, D., 11,
Niemann, G., 17,
Niese, B., 872
Néldeke, Th., 372, 741
Norden, E., 33, 711, 2, 852, 935: 132. 137g, 1761, 2921, 366g, 4214
Norton, F. O., 338,
Oehler, J., 3445
Oeser, H., 266,
Olga, Queen of Greece, 127,
Olivieri, A., 769, 3526
Oppenheim, Baron M. von, 461 Ostervald, J. F., 127,
Otto, W., 105i4 2851 3431, 3644
3725, Overbeck, F., 1471
Pagenstecher, R., 611, 4152 Papamichael, G., 64,4
Pape, W., 885, 98,, 102
Parthey, G., 3679, 5
Partsch, J., 323,
Pasor, G., 406, 407,
Passalacqua, J., 1679
Passow, F., 999, 4035
Paton, W. R., 143, 3214, 3276 3454)
3711. Patterson, L., 289, Paulus, F., 299; Pauly, A. Ἐν von, 146,, 168,, 265,
4534 Perdrizet, P., 233, 59, 277. Peter, H., 2315, 292, Peters, N., 38, Petersen, E., 17, Petrie, W. M. Flinders, 40,, 369 Petrone, M., 235,
INDEX
Pfister, F., 10,, 61,, 1263, 1281, 1321, 1331, 1345, 1374, 1685, 2652, 3465,
3650
Pfleiderer, O., 2643, 3633
Pierson, J., 804 —
Piscator, J., 1271
Plasberg, O., 437
Plassart, A., 423,
Plaumann, G., 462, 3242, 368,
Plooij, D., 51
Poland, F., 349,
Politi, the brothers, 28
Pomtow, J. [otherwise H.], 173
Pontier, G. J., 243
Pontremoli, E., 133, 148
Pope, A., 2304, 292,
Powell, B., 16,
Preisendanz, K., 2551, 2561, 9, 2581) 5,
30611
Preisigke, F., 121, 1495, 1769, 7 180o, 11» 24 1814, 184,, 186,, 187,,- 18859, 200g, 2011, 2023, 2049, 2991,
4034 Prellwitz, W., 4033 ὃ Premerstein, A. von, 171, 452, 3112,
4522
Prentice, W. K., τὸς Ἂ
Preuschen, E., 213, 4138, 4, 420, 1, 505
_ 2136, 22311, 306,
Price, F. Hilton, 305
Prior, M., 292,
Prott, H. von, 135
Psichari, J., 195, 732, 894, 1204, 1215» 1233, 1332
Puchstein, O., 14,4, 3633
Pulliblank, J., 713
Raabe, W., 396,
Rabel, E., 311, 2052
Radermacher, L., 209, 641, 942, 1203, 126, 1321, 210,
Raffael, 61,
Rahlfs, A., 233, 437 9
Railton, D., 442
Rainer, Archduke, 40, 40,, 44, 100g,
_ 3332
Ramsay, A. M., 219,
Ramsay, Sir W. M., xv, 5., 102, 139, 18g, 19, 239, 18295, 2192, 269, 2714, 2804, 3735) 4352 5, 5, 4361.
Redpath, H. A., 87.
Refer, 265,
Rehm, A., 139
Reiche, F., 2930
Reichel, H., 332,
Reiff, J. G., 97,
Reil, Th., 27,
Reiners ae 2749
Reinach, Th., 40, 270,, 289,,
ee Ων (collector ΤΣ ξ the
chott-Reinhardt papyri),
Reinhold, H., 1949 REBUT Se
Reisner, G. A., 52
Reitzenstein, R., 8, 56, 984, 1495, 22311, 2659, 288,, 3485, 3861, 399,
INDEX
Rembrandt, 144, 248, - mee? Gu. [W.], 3203, 3245, 3265, 32 Resch, A., 4335 nee Ὁ. 14, cci, 6, 243, 372, 46
Rich, A., 109 eae
Richter, Ὄ. M. A., 131}.
Riewald, P., 339 er lea Ritschl, F., Ritterling, πω Roberts, E. 5., 18,
Robertson, A. T., 21,, 126 Robinson, G. L., 4394
Rohde, E., 277,
Rohden, P. von, 291 *Roscher, ὟΝ. H., 35053
Rose, V., 844, 86,
Rosenbach, Z., 406,
Rossberg, C., 120,
Rossetti, C., 292,
Rostalski, F., 1933, 945, 954, 1249,
1375, 388,
Rostovtzeff, M., 1554
Rothstein, W., 35,
Rouffiac, J., 20,, 278,
Rouvier, J., 3441
Rubensohn, O., 37;
Rusch, A., 141,, 288,
Rudberg, G., 3757
» 2441, 338,
Sachau, E., 37, Said Ali; 377 (Fig. 72) Mirza Sa‘id Khan, 32, Sanders, H. A., 415 Sangiorgi, G., 131, Sarrara Yussuf, 253 (Fig. 47)" Sarre, F., 144 Sarteaux, F., 144 Sauer, A., 2299, 396, Savignac, R., 3534 Sayce, A. H., 379, 3332 Schaefer, E., 48, Schafer, Heinrich, 45, Schenkl, H., 329, Schettler, A., 12216, 3371 ἃ Schiele, 16, Schiff, A., sil Schirlitz, S. C., 407 ‘Schlatter, A., 21, 113, Schleiermacher, F. E. D., 381 Schlégl, N., 1271 Schlosser, ii, 1903, 406, manna Wilhelm (Tiibingen), 67,, 42» ar 963, 1224, 1332 Schmidt, Carl (Berlin), xv, 373; 412 43a 9 6 444 » 45: 2172, 221,
Schmidt, Kaci (εἴδεα, 243 Schmiedel, P. 26144, 2715, 4341 43744 43814; his adaptation of Winer’s Grammar, 19, 713, 73, . 934: 94a 1151) a 377.» 318,, 3190
517
Schmitthenner, A., 230,
Schneller, L., 36,
Schodde, G. H., 383,
Schoener, Chr., 3536, 362,
Schone, H., 403,
Schott, Friedrich (donor of Schott- Reinhardt collection of papyri),
374 Schow, N., 48, Schrader, H., 135 Schraderus, D., 318, 3321 Schramm, J. [ἢ 318, Schubart, W. : Einfiuhrung in die Papyruskunde, 249 441, 4251 Ein Jahriausend am Nil, 150, 1644, 1671, 1762, 1802, 201, 2138»,
2153, 2164
Papyrt Graecae Berolinenses, 24, 1670, 180,
confirms author’s conjectures,
18519, 1887, 9 25) 28 conjectures, 18811, 217, “ for freedom,’’ 3245 “ god and lord,’’ 361 literary papyti, 9, Palestinian papyri, 36, obtains photographs, 180,, 1841, 1879, 3316 Καίσαρος, 3771, σωσικόσμιος, 39442 saute P., 28, Schuchhardt, Cc. τ 35 Schulthess, F., 37 Schultze, V., 8), 2271, 3031 4352 Schulze, Wilhelm, 22,, 3464, 4351, 2» 3 Schiirer, E., articles by, 372, 2710, 4» 359u 4532» 4554 his Gesch. d. 74. Volkes, 19, 289 his Gesch. d. jtid. Volkes quoted on : Aramaic papyri, 372 Diaspora, 122,, 2891, 4231, 4514 guilds, 390, inscriptions, 157, 80s, 6, 1154, 3205, ς, 3221, 3535 Jewish martyrs, 3554 Jewish names, 122, Jews at Delos, 423, Jews at Jerusalem, 441, Jews at Miletus, 451, manumissions, 320s, 4, 322; “* Most High God,’’ 322,, 416 Septuagint, 4233 Shemoneh Esreh, 421 Solomon’s seal, 261, Temple inscription, 8035, ς theatre-going of Jews, 4524, 9 θεοσέβιοι, 4510, 4522 Γ΄ προσευχή in inscriptions, 102, Schweitzer, A., 252 Schweizer [= Schwyzer], Hy 224 Schwyzer [= Schweizer], E., 225, 6,
105, 170
102,
133 - Seeberg, R., 8, és
Seeck, Otto, 2353
518
Seidl, J. G., 442, -
Selbie, J. A., 591, 338
Selden, J., 318,
Setti, G., 199
Seu L. von, 322,
hakespeare, 109,, 3333, 390
Sickel, W., 37542. δ
Sickenberger, J., 643
Siebeck, P., ix, xiii, xvii; his sons, .ix, x
Sieffert, F., 319) ,
Smith, W. B., 260,
Smyly, J. G., 40.
Sobolewsky, S. J., 64,4
Soden, Baron H. von, 573, 58,4
Sogliano, A., 2772
Sophocles, E. A., 837, 899, 1115, 2244, 3484, 365s, 3787, 4313
Spengel, L. von, 368,
Spiegelberg, W., 372, 541, 171.
Stade, B. (1848-1906), 35
Staerk, W., 372, 28249
Stage, C., 129,
Stahelin, F., 455
Steinleitner, F., 1923, 2845, 328), 3993
Steinmann, A., 108,
Stellhorn, F. W., 407
Sterrett, J. R.S., 154
Steubing, A., 96,
Steuernagel, C., 38,
Stone, Darwell, 404)
Strachan, L. R. M., 742, 1804,, 2413, 262,
Strack, M. L., 494, 3441
Strauss, D. F., 3951
Streitberg, ὟΝ. (1864-1925), 38,
Stryck (Strickius), J. S., 318,
Stuart, D. R., 15,4
Stiibe, R., 245,
Sturz, F. W., 48,
Suicerus, J. C., 2092, 3492
Swainson, C. A., 458,, 460,
Swete, H. B., 359, 429, 634, 4040
Swoboda, A., 438
Tamassia, N., 199 Teneromo, J., 721 Tersteegen, G., 2625, 381, Teubner, B. G., 227 Teyler van der Hulst, P., 413, 4251 Thackeray, H. St. J., 197, 20,, 73 Thayer, J. H., 75.» 77, 79, 805, 81- 84 (§§ 2-9), 87, 88, 88, 89,, 8. 91, 95., 96,, 97, 97a, 102 (88 30, .31), 1031, 117 (8 3), 407 Theiss, J., 1844 Thieme, G., 204, 24}, 1069, 1163, 278,, , 3491, 3474 3592, 3639, 3738 Thiersch, H. W. J., 48, Thoma, Hans, 124, Thomas Aquinas, 381 Thomas Magister, 89, Thompson, Sir Herbert, 445, 505 Thomsen, P., 4392
INDEX
Thumb, A., 22,2, 63, 821, 942, 110s, 120,, 1226, 132}, 1859, 359%
Tischendorf, C., 432, 433
Tischhauser, Chr., 396., 3
Tod, M. N., 4049
Toepffer, J., 1159
Tolstoy, Leo, 72,
Toutain, J., 290,
Traub, G., 320,
Trede, Th., 386,
Trench, R. C., 78), 3275
Troeltsch, E. (1867-1923), xiv, 395,
Tromm, B., 25,
Tyndale, W., 127,
Unverzagt, W., 532 Usener, H., 126,, 2313, 2659, 3173, 3738
Van Dyke, H., 415
Viereck, P., 243, 479, 504, 541, 1162, 1495, 1791, a» 1995, 6, 7» 268
Vincent, Le 4395 Ν
Vischer, F. T., 3951
Vitelli, G., 1529, 1552, 2694, 7
Vélker, 50,
Vogel, F., 138,
Wachstein, B., 1492 Wackernagel, J., 196, 229, 637, 956 Waddington, W. H., τοῖ, 376, Wagner, A., 229 Walch, J. E. I., 125, 18, 407, Walther, W., 396, Warning, G., 78, Watson, Sir William, 413 5 Watzinger, C., τάς Weber, Ferd., 260,, 2624, 2634, 3355» 4574 i Weber, W., xiii: essays by, 452 Josephus und. Vespasian, 3655 Kaiser Hadrianus, 276,, 2933, 3486, 3649, 15, 3718, 5 τ, 37211 8) 4» ὃν 9»
3737, on Egyptian gods, 288, on emperor worship, 338, personal communications, 2772, 2789) 3454 3716 Weicher, Th., Figures 47, 54, 72 Weil, R., 136 Weill, R., 4391; 2 Weinel, H., 3391, 3497, 3627, 3736 Weinreich, O., 175, 1321, 156}, 2884, _ 3382, 3639, 3671 Weiss, B., 1173, 383, Weiss, E., 1674, 7 Weiss, J., 221, 131g, 1464, 2394, 2402, _ 3291 3974 Weissbach, F. H., 14, Weissbrodt, W., xi, 328,, 4214 Weizsacker, C. von, 1271, 1473, 2474 Wellhausen, J., 69,, 1145, 120g, 7, 1223, 128,, 184,
INDEX
Wendland, P., 89, 942, 146,, 147), 2324, 2659, 28219, 3104 3445, wens Pot 3665, 418,
» L., 12146, sa 3361, Weather, α΄ sabe 3351583 3391, 8 Wesley, J., 381,
Wessely, C. [K.]: Archduke Rainer’s papyri, 44,, 100,
Arsinoé, 268,
bibliography of papyri, 24, ~Caranis and Socnopaei Nesus, 268, Graeco-Sahidic Psalms, 44, libellus, 46,
London papyri, 86,, 306,
magical texts, 4164, 457,
Paris Magical Papyrus, 85ς, 254,, 2551» 2576 26141, 4185, 6 Patrologia Orientalis, 41,2,
2063, 20743, 2085, 2551 skirmishing with Kalinka, 206, Studien zur Palaeographie und ᾿ Papyruskunde, 250
ienna magical papyrus, τ χὰ
Westenberg, J. Ou 3uh, Ses
Westermann, A., 975, 6
Wettstein, J. J., 23, 31, 2033, 3093, 310g, 3143, 3171
Weymouth, R. F., 128,
White, H. G. Evelyn, 44,, 4251
White, H. J., 1272
Wiedemann, A., 26.
Wiegand, Th. :
personal help, xv, xX, 115ς, 130,
1314, 2784, 282,, 321g, 3281, 451,
470
4531. glass goblets, 129 ff. λύτρον inscription, 328, Miletus and Didyma, 13,, 144, 282), 3487, 3746 451, 453, 459 Petra, 144 Priene, 135, 115ς 2784 Sinai, 144, 362 Syria, Palestine, W. Arabia, 14,4 - Untergang . . . der Denkmdler, 59 Wikenhauser, A., 49g, 761, 774. 843, 914 Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, U. von: Bellenus Gemellus, L., correspond- ence of, 298, calendar inscription of Priene, 366,
3679 Cree Corpora of Greek inscriptions, 125 emperor worship, 3383, 3465 graffito from Alexandria, 303; Griechisches Lesebuch, 1762, 219,»
231g | 4 inscription from Kasr Nawa, 462 John, St., Third Epistle, 242,
* lords, the most great gods,’’ 352, Paul, St., letters of, 240, Theon the bad boy’s letter, 201, Timotheus, ‘‘ The Persians,’’ 37, πάπας, 2194 “πολλαπολλων, 168,
Wilberg, W., 135
519
Wilcken, U.: (i) Personal help to the author: communications respecting :
Apamenian cohort, garrison of, 1829,
autograph conclusions to docu- ments, 167)
Hermupolis, 218
Isis inscription, source of, 138,
letter from Antonius Maximus to Sabina, construction in, 184,
letter from Caor, 2172, 9, 15
letter from Nearchus to Helio- dorus, 174, 3) 9
letterfrom Zoilus, 152.,,15323:5 6 157, 1593 |
letter, imperial, ¢. Hadrian, 843
letter, oldest (?) Christian, con- jecture in, 207,
letter, oldest (9) Christian, trans- lation of, 20919
libelli, 46
note of hand written by aman- uensis, 3315
parusia mentioned by villagers of Aphrodite, 372,
resignation (‘‘no one is im- mortal ’’) in epitaphs, 178,
restoration of text of edict of G. Vibius Maximus, 271, 5
revision of text of papyrus letter published by Parthey, 3672, 5
“‘scourge and release’’ (papy- rus parallel to Mark xv. 15),
269, ‘table of the lord Serapis,’’ 3512 Toéto, 2144 ; δίδωμι ἐργασίαν in Bremen papy- rus, 116 εἰκόνιν, ‘little picture,’’ dier’s letter, 18045 conjectures, 138, 1643, 18841, 19 fourth edition, xv Ἔ illustration obtained, 358, ostraca in author’s collection deci- phered, 542, 121, 121g, 19, 200, 2042, 359 f. i proof-sheets read, xvii, 1005 (ii) Works: Works on papyrology, 243, 259 proposed edition of Ptolemaic Papyri, 1342 Archiv fir Papyrusforschung, 259; __ referred to for: abbreviated ,titles for papyrus publications, 405 Abinnaeus correspondence, 218, alien tax, III; Appion, bishop of Syene, peti- tion, 48, Aramaic papyri, 37, Bale papyrus, 2052
r in sol-
520 INDEX
Wilcken, U.: (ii) Works (cont.) :
Wilcken, U.: (ii) Works (cont.) : Griechische Ostvaka, referred to
Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung,
referred to for: -
bibliographies, 392
“by Caesar, god of god,” 3451
chavagma, 341)
commentary, model, 47
Despotes, title of Christian em- perors, 3571
diptych of veteran, 4429,4441,1011)
4454
financial appeal of priests, 156,
Florentine papyrus, 269,
“ further levy of 14 obols,’’ 360;
hymn to the Virgin, 56,
Irenaeus to Apolinarius, letter, 211g ᾿
letter copy-books, 2358, 4» 5» 6» 236ς
libellus, 464, 2
‘lord of the diadems,’’ 3524
Lord’s Prayer, 48,
mother’s name in magical texts, 306,
Nearchus, letter of, 1745, 9
ostraca in museums, 54,
ostracon, commentary on, 105,
ostracon and papyrus with bind- ing-charm, 306;, 2
“ Pagan and Christian in Egypt,”’ 476 481 2
Paris papyrus, 1342
petition by villagers of Aphro- dite, 372.
petition of Appion, bishop of Syene, 48,
Psalm lxxx from Rhodes, 233
Psenosiris, 470, 2144 i
Ptolemaeus to Damoxenus on dreams, 134,
review of ‘‘ Pubblicazioni,’’ 152., 155, 1562, 157, 1593
Sarapis cult at Delos, 156,
for: Jewish names, 122,
“lord,”’ 353s, 353 f., 3551 ostraca at Athens, 52,; at Dak-
keh, 51,4 parusia dues and taxes, 369,, 3792
“‘ publicans,’’ 269,
Sebaste Day, 3592, ¢
Thebes, quarters of the city, 121,
“ tribute’? of two drachmae, 2693
ἀπέχω, aorist-present, 110,
ἀρχιποίμην, a parallel, 100,
᾿Επείπ, 185 09
Καίσαρος, 3771-
λογεία, 1051» 2» 4» δ» 7» 14
πλήρης, 1244
σύναρσις λόγου, 117ς
Grundztige und Chrestomathie der.
Papyruskunde, 259, 405, 452» 470 1500, 164, 1763, 1802, 181), 18222, a4 26 18815, 2051, 2136, 2144) 5, 2164, 2694, 2714, » 3390, 3522) 4422, 4441, 10 11. 4454
Hermes, articles in, referring to:
Berlin papyrus, date of, 843 census, 2714
manumission, Christian, 328, recto and verso, 29,
rolls, papyrus, 293
Other publications :
᾿Αγαθὸς Δαίμων, 3454
Antisemites at Alexandria, 45, 120,
crossed-out I.0.U., 3344
Danoilos, 122,
Julia Sebaste, 358,
Pharaoh, form of addressing, 3523, .
“ with a price,’ 324,
Wilhelm, A leaden tablets for ‘‘ binding,’ 304,,
Sebaste Day, 3596 .
“table of Serapis,’’ 3513
Zoilus, letter of, 152., 8, 1532) δ᾽ 8» 155, 1562, 157, 1598
ἔνοχος with genitive, 1143
ἐπίξενος, 1115
εὔμοιρος, 1764
κυριακαὶ ψῆφοι, 3582
λεσῶνις, 171}
3053 oldest Greek letter, 150, 1503, 1515 prayers for vengeance at Rheneia, 413129) 414, 4141, 415, 4152 4165, 4173, 4183, 4191, 2, 420, 4203, 422, 4224, 4232 on Priene, 13; σωσικόοσμιος, 3651 Reisen in Kilikien, 17,. Die griechischen Papyrusurkunden, Septuagint influence in an inscrip- 243, 31. tion, 23,4 Griechische Ostraka, 50,5 51), ἱερὰ γράμματα, 3759, 3765 "52 ff.; texts quoted in full Aoyetw, 105, from, 105, 166; referred to Wilisch, E., 15, for: Wilke, Chr. G., 75 Apollonius Dyscolus, 552 Grimm’s Wilke, 75), 77, 308, 407 bath tax, 3604) Wilkins, G., 427; collections, religious, 1052,4:57:44 | Wilski, P., 134 dues payable in Egypt, 54, 3393 Wilson, W. E., 241, embankment tax, 360, Windisch, H., 31, 10,, 147,» 272 Hellenic calendar, 18519 355s) 3952 e
INDEX ‘
Winer, G. B., 419,. See also Schmie- del.
Winnefeld, H., 135, 6, 366
Winter, F., 14,
Wirtz, J., 3275
Wissowa, G., 1461, 1687, 2655, 4534
Witkowski, S., 303, 50,, 633, 1222, 1321, 150 2, 1641, 167% 1, 2 τόδε
Woenig, F., 25;
Wolters, P., 422
Wood, E. D., a
Wood, J. T.,
Wordsworth, wi, 138,
Worrell, W. H., 3305
Wrede, W., 244,
521
Wulzinger, K., 14,
Wiinsch, R., 233, 955, 6 150, 1504, 2562, nd 3029, 3946, 3053, 305, 3331)
Wyclif(fe), “i τὰ ΕΝ 262ς
‘Zahn, R., 135
Zahn, Th., 19, 215, 2441, 338:
Zeller, E., 4395:
Zereteli, G., 1728.
Ziebarth, Ἕ. +» 136 173, 150, 268, 2784, 4513
Ziemann, F., 1679, 1843, 2324
Zolotas, G. I. +» 12049
Zorell, F., 4075
Zwaan, J. de, 492, 5, 1110, 301,
1512»
VI.—PASSAGES CITED. .
A. THE GREEK BIBLE
Septuagint
xix. 24 ff.
XXV. 19-22
XXvi. 3, 4 Exod.i. τα.
i. 16
i, 22
li. 3 é
“iii, 8, 17 vii. ff.
XXXiv. 7 Lev. vi. 9, 12,13. Xvi. 29, 31 xxi, 17. xxiii. 27, 29, 32 xxiii. 29 xxiii. 34 Num. xiv. 18 xvi. 22. xxvii. 16 Deut. v.16 . vi. 4 ff. . vii. 13 ix. τὸ xvi, 13. xvi. 16. xix. 4, 5 xix. Io. -
206 26145 1396 13978 140, 3132
᾿ 26145) 26311
140, 140, 2626 418 2644 1401. 20141 2024 437 437 261, 168, 168, 302 26144 261, 2014 3069 201, - 262, 2575, 2623 Ξ 234 418 1404 417 140, 306, 418 263: 410 126, 419 419
Deut. xix. 10-13 .
XXVii. 24
XXvili. 22, 28
XXx1. 10
xxxii.
xxxii. 43 Josh. iii. 13 ff.
Xvi. 28.
2 Sam. xii. 4 xv.
xvi. xvii. 7 . xxii. 11
1 Kings viii. 8 xii. 30 . xxi. 8
2 Kings v. 27 ix.7 ς ix.31 .
2 Chron, iii. 11 viii. 13 . XXxiil. 6
Ezra iii. 4 iv. 11
Neh. v. 19 xiii. 31 .
Job vii. 20 viii. τα.
ix. 7 ff. . Χχχίν. 23 XXXVili. 9 XXXViii. IO Xxxviii. αὐ XXXViii, 22 Xxxvili. 26, XXxvili. 31 f. . XXxix. 7
xl. 16 [21]
Ps. xv.
xvii. [xviii] 8 xviii. [xix.] 2
xxxiv. [xxxv.] 13 XXXVI. [Xxxvil.] 16 XXXVi. [xxxvii.] 17, 39
ΧΙ. [xli.] 10 xlii, [xliii.] 4 xliii. [xliv.] 26 xlv. [xlvi.J τὸ xIvi. . ὃ
Ps.
INDEX
Ivii. [Iviii.] 6 . 417 Ixvii. [Ixviii.] 20. 178, Ixxvii. [Ixxviii.] 26, 52 2585 xxix. [Ixxx.] 2 : 462 Ixxx. . 233 Ixxxv. ([Ixxxvi. 1 τ᾽ 361ς Ixxxvii. [Ixxxviii.] 2 3614 xcix. [c.] 4 463 cil. [cili.] 20 418 ciii. [civ.] 15 130, ciii. [civ.] 32 2638 ον]. [cvii.] τό 2636 cxiii, [cxiv.] 3 262, cxviii. [cxix.] 127 1409 ΟΧΧΙ. [cxxii.] 3, 4 1395 exxvi. [cxxvii.] 1 4583 cxxvili. [cxxix.] 4. 262 Cxxxiv. [CXxxV.] 7 . 26146, 2624, Cxxxiv. [Cxxxv.] Io, 11 140, exxxiv. [cxxxv.] 21 26243 cxxxv. [Cxxxvi.] 17-20 140, exxxvi. [cxxxvii.] 8 417 CXxXxViii. [Cxxxix.] 23 20144
exl. [cxli] 6 . ᾿ 98 (§ 26)
᾿ exlvii. 5 [16]. 260, Ῥτον. KeO « 417 x. 19 216, xi. 30 417 xiii. 2 41 Eccles. viii. τ. 86 (δ 12) Song of Sol. iv. 1, 3 4“, 7 462 ν. 2 : 463 vi. 3 ff. 462. Isaiah i. 3 275 ii. 17 419 vi.3. 26149 xiv. 9 2635 xviii. 2. 30 xix. 6 30 xxii. 13 2954 XXXV. 7. 30 XXXVIi. 14 35 xIlv.9 . ‘ 515 lviii. 3, 5, Io . 419 Miii. 11-14 425 Ixv. τσ. 351 Ixvi. 15 ff. 2635 Jer. i. 6-10 . 2619 i 14 3192 ν. 22 2625, 10» 11 vi. 28 263ς vii. τό. 416 ΧΙ. 14. 416 ΧΧΧΙ, [xxxviii. 131 fi. 3374 xxxii. 8-15 ᾿ 34 xxxii. [xxv.] 30 1359 XXXVii. [xxx.] 2 1352 xliii. [xxxvi.] 2, 4 1354 Ezek. ii, 10 ᾿ 29 xvi. 15, 25. 2958 Χχχίχ. 20 351 xliv. 16 351 Dan. vi. 13, 24 2269 Joel iii. [iv.] 21 ; - 420 Zech. ix. 9 . ἢ . 368,
Γ
Zech. xiv. 16, 18, τ: ἕξ Mal. i. 7, 12 ii, 14 ii. 15, 16 1 Esdras v. 51 vii. 2 Tob. vii. 3 [14] xii. Ig . $ Judith iv. 9-13 X17 s Esther v. 1 (xv. 2) Wisdom vii. 1, 2 xii. 3-5 xiv. 3 ff. Ecclus. ii. 17 vii. 17. xvi. 7 xxiv. xxiv. 6. xxiv. IT xlvi. 5. xvii. 5. li.1q. Susanna 28 ff. 1 Macc. iii. 25 v. 13 X. 21 xi. 22 xi. 28. 2 Macc. i. 9, 18 1. 10 li. 7 iii. 24 iii. 31 iii. 39 vii. 28 . vil. 35. viii. 17. ix. 19 x. 6 x. 13 xii. 7 xii. 22 xiii. 4 xiv. 3 XV. 2 3 Macc. ii. 4. ii. 21 iv. 4 Vv. 35 vi. 13 vi. 17, A vii. 7
Aquila, Gen. i. 1-5 Exod. ii. 3
Symmachus, 2 Kings i iii. 4 Jer. xiv. 8. :
New Testament.
Matt. i, I-9, 12, εἰς -20 . os ese} ii. 12 1.13.
30
463
. 1352 431, 4334
524
Matt. ii. 22. lii. 3 iv. 17
xvii. 24 xvii. 25 xviii. 6. xviii. 23 f. xviii. 30 xix. 17. xix. 27. xx. . xx. 28 . xx. 28, D xxi. 5. xxi. 33-41 xxii. 3 ff. xxii. 10. xxii. 12. xxii. 21 xxili. 15 XXV. 19 XXv. 36 xxvi. 18 ΧΧΥῚ. 24 xXVi. 50 'xxvi. 66 XXVi. 67 XXvil. 25
xxvii. 31-32 .
xxviii. 13 Mark i. 25
i. 27
iii. 21
v. 8
v.9
v.15
ν. 40-41
vi. 3
vi.7.
vi.8
vii. 35.
ix. 3
1x. 17
INDEX
xxi, 1353 Mark ix. as ff.
428 ix. 18 428 ix, 22 198, ix. 25 1148 ix. 42 18915 x. 18 270 Χ. 24 42713 x. 28 . 2044 xX. 32 110 (§ 2) x AS . 72 X11. I-9 25 xii. τό. . 427 xii. 26 . . 108 ff. xil, 35. 4275 xili. 9 1653 xiii. 11 3362 xiv. 21 429 xiv. 32 272-275 xiv. 41 42710 ὲ τιν ἐς 42 144 3973 XV. 15 1234 XV, 21 181g, 3073 xvi. 14, 15 - 386, Luke i. a 2692 i,36 τας ii. σ 1. I ii. 3 117 8 3) ΗΝ ᾿ Ε 7ο ; ᾿ . 3456 iii rt. 198,, 199 iv. 16-21 - 0644 iv. 53 Ὁ : 327 vi. 428, viii. 30 . 368, viii. 35 . 336 1X. 3 428, x. 4 12 x. IT 126 x. 17, 20 2524. xX. 30 . 450 x. 40. 117 (§ 3) x1.,20 . xix xi. 29 162, xi. 50 226, χὶ. 6. 125-131 ΤΟ ΧΗ τὰ ἢ. 1148 xii. 13-16 226, xii. 16-21 22641 xii, το. xii. 21. 230. “xii. 42. 260 xii. 57 . xXx xii. 58 162, xiii. 6 ff. 260, xiii. 16 . 261) xiv. 7 ff. 83 (8 οἷ xiv. ae xv. 11 ff. 160, Χχν. 12. 122 (ὃ 2) χν. τό. . 108 ff. xv. 18, 21 ΤΟΣ xv. 22 ff. XV. 29. 58 XV. 32.
. + 49, 492, 112 . IIT, . 226, 3 - 269, 269,
: 116 (8 2) 116 (§ 1), 270 ; . 292, 307
428
429)
188
166,
20294
17849
INDEX
Luke xvi. 6. 2 : 333
xvi. TS ς : + 4271_ 14» 15 xvii. 4. . ὃ . 1924 xvii. 15 f. : ᾿ . 13649 xvii. 18 2 ᾧ 79 (ὃ 1) xvii. 21 3 , . 4278 Xviii. 1 ff. is @ zs 134, xviii. 7, 8 ᾿ τὶ 369 xviii. 8 . ᾿ " ες 421 xviii. 13 . " - 190, xviii. 19 g Ὰ - 3456 xviii. 28 198,, 199 xviii. 29 - 3045 xviii. 33 ‘ ᾿ . 2696 xix. 40. zi " ig 2056 Xx. 9-16 x x 336 Bx, TG « ν τ 33% RX. 4T « a Υ . 4279 ΧΧΙ. 9 . . 5 + 42745 xxi. 14 f. : : . 336ς xxii. 25 f. τ ᾿ . 2535 xxii. 35 f. 108 xxii. 40-71 581 ΧΧΙΙ. 42 ἥ " . ΙΒῚρ xxii. 48 ᾿ 5 . 1293 xxiii. 2-6 é ᾿ 38, xxiil. 34 ‘ 5 + 420 xxiv. 5-9 38, XX1V. 20 190ς8 gee 42715 John i. 1-9 . 5 i, 14 . . 123f i, 14-17 58 iii. 17. 949 laos 3646 iv. 48 386, iv. 51 1345 vi. 37 3524 vl. 44 426 vi. 51 1653 vii. 2 ᾿ ὰ : 115 vii. 24 . 3 “ ᾿ 932 viii. 6, 8 ὗ ‘ . 2453 viii. 36. ᾿ ᾿ - 3273 ix. 1 ff. , 4 , 307
ix.6. , ᾿ . 1365 χ 7 ς: 5 ‘ + 136,
ix. 7, II x ᾿ 135 Χ. 7Ξ14 5 a .  I4r xii. 32 . : ὃ . 426 xii. 42. : . . 4279 xiii. 18 . “ see 226. xiv.3 . . ᾿ . 178, xiv.9 . ᾿ Ξ 7598
xiv. τ6,26. : » 3304 xv. 14 f. " ‘ . 377
xv. 1I5 . a ὁ - 378,4 xv. 26. : Ξ . 336,
χνὶ. 7. : ᾿ 336, xviii, 19-25. ; ᾿ 58 ΧΙΧῚ. Ξ Ν . 2696 xix. 12. : : . 378, xix. 15. ‘ : + 2024 xix. 15-17. ‘ : aoe
John xx. 25. ᾿ " : 18ly¢
xx, 28. 7 ‘ . 361g Xx. 29. ; : . 386ς
Acts i. 3 ‘ " ᾿ 83 (§ 7)
1,02 ς ‘ 5 . 17%, vig. " ες 441 vii. 32. ᾿ 5 . 2583 vii. 53 ‘ ; . 89 viii. 27 . F ᾧ + 3528 ix: 6 ς ‘ xX, XX1 x.22 ~~. _ : . 1382 xiii. 6 ff. : . 1594 ΧΙ. 9. : : 2810 xiii. 15 ff. ἢ ν᾿ . 440% xiv. Ir. ἡ ᾿ . ~ 2806 xiv. 23. : Ἢ . 1131 xv. 28. " : . 444ς χνὶ. 7. : ᾿ - 158, xvi.g . : , » 300, xvi. 9 f. . ᾿ . 15840 χνὶ. 29... . : . 2583 Xvi. 37. F - 1369 xvii. 18 Ἶ ‘a 99 (§ 27): xvii. 22 ‘ ὃ . 2855 xvii. 22-31. » 384, xvii. 24-31. : . 387 xvii. 23 ᾿ 7 . 254. xvii. 26 2 . 390, xvii. 28 7 3114, 387, 9 Xvii. 31 ᾿ . 3879, 3893 xviii. 2. ‘ Ἢ . Oly xviii. 4 . ‘ ᾿ ες 16) xviii. 8 . ᾿ ᾽ . 121ς xviii. 24 ν᾿ . . 1592 xviii. 27 : . . 3528 xviii. 28 ‘ : . 1360 xix. é . ὰ . 113 xix. 19. 5 . 2544 xix, 21. é ᾿ . 158, xix. 24. x . 113 xix. 27. : és . 281, xix. 29. : ὦ . 281, xix. 32,41. " . 1131 ΧΧ. 3 Ξ Η ᾿ 4365, 4 24s - 437 Ἔχ ae 437 xx. 15 ff. 458, xx. 15, 17 4515 xx. 20. 136, xxi. 23 ff. 15849 xxi. 28 f. Og xxi. 38 . 3554 xxii. 18 ‘5 . 1583 xxii. 27 ὃ : . 3394 NK. 12,21. ‘ 2033 XXV. 21 ἢ : - 3425 χχν. 26 . . . 3546 xxvi. 3. Ξ ᾿ . 3675 xxvii. 6,38. P . 211g xxvii. 9. : ὲ . 4234 xxvii. 34 7 : - 1δ1}5 Rom. i. 1-7. 239 f. (Fig. 46 i. 8 ᾿ - 88,, 1δὲς igf. . Ἵ A . 1845
τὸ. 5 . . 201g
526 INDEX Rom. i. 24 ff. . 283, 1 Cor. vii. 23. ii. 5 93 (ἢ το) Tied 1.14. . 3105 vii. 31 ii. 14 ff.. - Ξ118 vii. 32 iii. 24 3275» 3304 vii. 35. ‘ νι το, Ν 97 vii. 39 iv. 21 86, viii. 2, Cod. 37 ν. 7 118, viii. 5, 6 v. 13 . 84 (§ 8) ix. 7 v.14, 17, 21 xxi ix. 9 vi. 6, 17, 19, 20 3237 ix. 16 vi.I2 . E xxi ix. 17 vi. 18 . 326, X. 19-21 vi. 22. 326, Χ, 21 viii. 2. 326, Χ. 25 viii. 19 . 3795 373s x. 27 viii. 20 . + 3239 x. 31 viii. 21. . 326, xi. 20 viii. 23 . . 3237 xi, 27 viii. 26 . : 87 xii. 3 viii. 26-34 + 3363 xii. 13 χα . Ζ201ρ xiii. xi. 4 . 1534 xi, I xi. 17 ff . 274 xili.g . ᾿ xiii. 2 . 89,91 χίν. 3, 5, 12, 26 xiii. 7 1112, 3398 xiv. 19 . é xv. 16 . . 158, xiv. 32. xv. 19 : 885, 2761. xv. 10 XV. 20 ᾽ ἢ ὡς 150g XV. 23 Χν. 22 18941 XV. 32 XV. 25 Ξ . 437. xv. 58 . xvi. 171, 2004, 235 ff., 279 xvi. I, 2 : xvi. I ᾿ : . 2359 Χν]. 3. Ξ xvi. 3 ff 438 xvi.6 Ξ xvi. 4 ‘ . 117. χνὶ. 8. 5 xvi. 5 . 2791 Χν]. 9. β Xvi. 6, 12 + 3134 xvi. 17. . xvi. 17-20 2794 Xvi. το. . xvi. 20 : + 421 xvi. 21. ἕ xvi. 21. 4371 438, 4384 Xvi, 22. xvi. 22 ἥ . 236, 2Cor.i.23. 1Cor.i.4g . 181, ii, 12 i, 12 377 iii. 1 i 14 121, iii. 3 i, 22 ᾿ 2225, 386, iv. Ir. i, 26-31 By τόν, 67, τ44, 1595 ν.1 111. 9 160, Vv. 3 iii. 10 ; 160, v. 18 iii. 16 ἢ. : 160, v. 20 iii, 23 ‘ 377 vi. 16 iv. 8 : xxi viii. 9 iv. τὸ 3 192, ix. 12 iv. 12 . 3134 x. I iv. 17 ἢ 1714 bam ἃ iv. 20 ῳ . 79 xi. 6° ν. 4,5 ἢ 302,, 302, χὶ. 232 . ν. 7, 8 ὦ + 3294 xi. 23 ff. vi. 9 Ἴ . 1644 χὶ. 25. vi. 9, τὸ ᾿ 316 Χχὶ, 26. vi. 19 . 160, xii ἢ vi. 20 : 324, xii. 7 ff. vii. 19 - 376; xii. 8. vii. 20 : 385. xii. 8 ff. vii, 21 ἥ 329, xii. 9 ᾿ vii. 22 ‘ 326, 377 ~~ Gal. i. 1-vi. ro.
oes,
3241, ao
3 . 326, ὃ . 282ρ 19314, 3245
. 3264
3246
96,
3558
10644
275
158,
3742
351
3141
171
- 2709
Gal.i.8,9 . Ξ . 3032 i. 14 18145 ii, 1, 2 Ε . 1585 il. 4 3253 ii. 7 + 3744 iii. 1 » 19310 iil. 13 3295, 33% iii. 15 + 90g iii. 16 ες 43) iii. 28 3295 380, iii. 29 - 377 iv. 1-7 32310 iv. 4 551 iv. 5 . 324, iv. 8,9 . 32341 iv. Ir. ᾿ . 314. ΝΟΙ . : 325), 3243, 3254 ν. 2 ‘i - 166, ν. 13 . 3244 v.17 . 325, v. 18 3251 ν. 24 + 377 Wi τι. 166,, τον vi. 11 ff vi. 12 98 8 26), Εἴς vi. 17. . 301s
Eph. i. 7 . 3303 i. τό 181,, 1844 1.9. ς 26139 ii. 14 x1 ii. 20 ff - 160, iii. τὸ ᾿ + 2610 νὶ. 12. : é . 26149 vi. 18 . . 102 (§ 30) vi. 20 . 374
Phil. i. 3 159), 181, i, 12 . 188, 1.13 τ . 238, i. 23 . 303, ii. 5-11 . 342, 11,9, 11 3552 il. 10 » 261: 11. 16 . 314, ii, 20 f. 438 ii. 30 F ῳ 88 (ὃ 14) iii. 7,8. ᾿ 192. iii. 8 786
3 iv. 3 119 (8 5). 1346, 1935, 464 8
INDEX
iv. I ᾿ 112 (8 2), 331. ἵν. 22 160,, 2385, 441 Col. i. 3 ἢ . “81, i7 - 376 1.1. τ ε ες 3304 1.14. , + 332, 3338 1,18, ὃ ες 453 iii, τι. ᾿ 3894 iii, τό. : 1γ6ς ἵν. 3. . Ὲ + 800 ἦν. 7 . ‘ + 1984 iv. τι. i 5 438 iv. 14 ; 438, ἦν. τό . . 238, iv. 18 1721 t Thess. i. 2 Ρ 181g, 1843 2.0 Ἔ : a . 198,
1 Thess. ii. 4. ii, 19
ee
1.1). 1 Tim. i. gf. i, Ir ‘
Tit. i. 3
iii, 3 Philem.4 . 10 é
xiii 5. xiii. 22-24 xiii. 24. James ii.6 . ii. 7 ‘
3704, 373 3714 3143: τόδ᾽, 171}, 172. 317 374: . 302 - 362, + 3278 4153
88 (§ ), 89, 15 97 85 (8 11), nts
«376 3096 3735 1845 3726 375 f. 373s 309,
+ 30% 18946, 369 - 316, 30, 152 4516 3744 279%
314 3735
- 3239 181g, 1845 εὖ 335
. 528
James ii. 8. ‘ii, 1 iv. 13 ff. ἵν 15. 1 Peter i. 18, 19 i. 19 ii, 17 iii. 3,4. iii. 6 iii. 7 v.3f. . 2 Peter i. 5, 6
xiii. 18 . xiv. 3 xiv. 12. xiv. 13. XV..3 XV. 4 xvii. 14 xviii, 13 xix. 16. xxii,6 . xxii. 21
INDEX
362,
B. THE Latin BIBLE
Gen. xli. 53 . Deut. viii. 17 Job xiv. 14
Ps. Ivi, [lv.] 13 [12]
Esther xvi. 18
57 ‘Annales du Service des Antiquités de
Ecclus. xvi. 16. . . 450 xxiv. 46 . . ες 449 Xxxvill. 16. ᾿ ες 449 ΧΙ. τό. ᾿ : - 449
Baruch iii. 3 E 5 449
2 Macc. vi. 11 ἢ Ὁ ες 449 xii. 44. ᾿ ᾿ ες 449
Matt. viil. 11 5 : ες 449 xix. 28. : ὶ 449 xxvi. 50 ‘ 12 5-131
Luke xx. 35 ᾿ Ξι ες 449
Rom. i ii. 6 f. ὸ : ες 450 1.1.3... : ᾿ ες 449
Phil. 111.5. 4 . 449
2 Thess. 1. 5 ᾿ . - 449
1 Tim. ii. 10 ὃ : - 449 iii, ir. ᾿ ‘ - 449
Tit. i. 2 ὃ ‘ ῷ ες 449
Heb. vi. 18 ‘ . + 450.
Rev. iii. 21 . Η ες 449
Ο. INSCRIPTIONS.
American Journal of Archaeology,
2nd ser. Vol. 7 (1903) No. 1, Inscriptions from Corinth ae 49 . us Vol. 10 (1906) p American Seagal of Classical ‘Stndics at Athens, Papers of the, 2, 22
_ VEgypte, 22, pp. 78. . 449, Athenische Mitteilungen :
2 (1877) p. 81 . ᾿ . 1364 7 (1882) p. te . - 02, 16 (1891) p. 4068. . . IS,4 21 (1896) p. 98 . 3 ‘ 925
24 (1899) p. 199 . . 197% 24 (1899) p. 275 ff. . . 366,
24 in Pp. 406 . . 87, 27 (1902) p. 48 ff. + 3625.
Berliner Phi ologische Wochenschr. - 2% (1901) col. 475 . 362,
British School at ‘Rehens Annual of the, 1914-16, Ee 181 8. 328, 6,
Bulletin de Corresp. lénique :
21 (1897) p. 60. 109, 21 se p. 65. ἡ ες 84, 22 (1898) p. 58. a » IIt, 22 (1898) p. 116 ἢ . 1117 22 (1898) p. 120 ‘ . ILI, 23 1898) p. 355 ᾿ . 3214
2 (1898) p. 496 . 3157 a (1899) p. 274 ᾿ . 227y
23 (1899) p. 301 . . 3155 25 (1901) p. 62 ff. : . 378ς 25. ae p. 88. 3 . 3184 25 (1901) p. 275 ᾿ . 3726 25 (1901) p. 279 ὃ + 3184 25 (1901) p. 416 . ," II, 28 ae . 195 Ξ . 3760 28 (1904) p. 330 ἢ . 1372 - Bulletin ae Ia Société . Archéol. d’Alexandrie, No. 12 (1910), p. 16 ee . ἃ . 2954
INDEX 529 Bull. della comm. arch. comm. di Dittenberger, Ovientis Gvraeci In-
Roma, 1903, 279 . » 214 scriptiones Selectae : Buresch, Aus Lydien, p.197 . 328, No. 139 368 Byzantin. Zeitschr. : 168, 1755 14 (1905) pp. I-72 461-464 186, 3520 14 (1905) p. 21 ff., IOI, 201. 1373, 217 Cagnat, Inscriptiones Gvaecae ad 210, gs 107, ves Rom. pert. : ° 262 ‘ 101, ΠῚ. No. 188 3745 33828 3244 III. No. 1086 3535 415 3531 Collection of Ancient Greek Inscrr. 418 3534 in the Brit. Mus. : 423 3534 No. 15854 - IIT, 425 3534 587b 3092 426 3531 604 3095 438. 317s 633 (p. 249) 928 441109 ττός 722 . 141 45919 992 τι + 344ς 458. 366
8. " ‘ , 2 Collitz and Bechtel, Dialekti τ ΤΙ : Cap a II. No, 189945 « 824 606 353. III.? No. 4959 . 98, 610, 378. Corpus Inscriptionum Atticarum, 62930) 45 81, Appendix p. xiii. f.. 955 655 3450 361, p. XXX. + 3046 666 3454 Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum : 668 364, No. 1378 - . 845 6691-46 358, 1732a3, 84, 6695 358 2566 98 66915) 18 358 2664 96, 669 ast. 270, τῖν Ν b = oes Dittenberger, Sylloge I nscriptionum 7 : - vaecavunt :
294310 : » 37511 No. 226, ®495 est. 3703 3465, . . 905 250, 8412). 875 3499at. . 3783 325, °708,, . 8510 35004 378, 325, *70845 18145 4300, (p. 1128) 991 328, 974191 2 - - 3709 447451 - Tor 342, ®70259 : - 885 4609. - 3454 347, 5760 : 3445 4759 - 4353 376, 381431, α΄ - ες 3544 5980 1 δε. 1351 415, 388: . 376ς zee an 418, Pie 95 3704.8 8888 a Bae fasots ΕΝ 9552 3135 803, ϑιτόο;ς 37% 9727 : : Ol, 804, 811 70go¢. 308, II. add. No. 2322 b. 69 417 807, 91173 s58f. 1351 IL. add. No. 2322 Ὁ. 78° 417 844. . 3215 III. add. No. 4700k . 4353 845. 323} IV. pp. 395, 397 4572 845, - IIL, Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum : 850. 326, IIT. p. 836 3 ᾿ 84, 85718 : 82, VI. 17685 ᾿ 4352 891, *1240 . 234, 96s VIII. No. 2557. 1814, 929, 9685100 106, Delphes, Inscriptions vec. ἃ, par Dittenberger, ‘Sylloge Inscriptionum
_. Wescher et Foucart No. 66 326, Didyma, Inscr. from (hand-list No.
_ 350). Ε a - 378 Diels, Vorsokvatiker,? Ὁ. 480, No. 17 ff.
᾿ , 3031 Dittenberger, Ovientis Graect In-
scriptiones Selectae : No. 55,11. + : . ᾿ 90, - . . .
900 - : : :
14, 3525 3452
Graecayum?:
No. 783az. 3414 1181 4132
1259 : ᾧ 150,
1260 . ‘ 152}
1267 . 1373
1268 311,
Ed. Apx. 1892, col. 173 ft. 234) 96,
Epheces, Forschungen in (see p. 13, n. 1), 2, p. 147 ff. 1124
530 Heberdey, Opramoas, p. 50, xixA,
104 Heberdey and Kel Bericht, No. 59 + 312,
Herzog, K oische KF orschungen und Funde: ~
No. 24, 25 253s
163 2951
165 3774
p. + 3214, 3276 Heuzey and Daumet, Ῥ. 432 ff. 3204 Hierapolis, Altertiimer von, No. 78
90,
p. 201 970
oO, Hoffmann, Die Griech. ‘Dialekte, III. p. 72 . ᾿ + 102, Inscriptiones Graecae :
III. 2, p. xiii. f. i“ 955 IIT. No. το (21081) 367, ITI. 2, No. 1355 971 III. Pars III. App. p. ‘ii. f. 150, III. Pars III. No. 108 + 303, IV. No. 204 45% IV. No. 205 4576 aoe XI. 4, No. 1299 156,
XII. 2, No. 58:0 . : 99 XII. 3, Suppl. No. 1270,, ;
1039, 4 XII. V. 1, No. 14 . 1374 XII. V. 1, No. 132 + 3763 XII. V. 1, No. 739 1391, 142,
XIV. No. 1072 . + 3423 Jahreshefte des Osterr. “Arch, Inst. :
2 (1899) Suppl. p. 43 f. 1125 4 ee Suppl, La 9 ff. : 413 ff. 7 (1904) p. 81 ff 1033 7 (1904) p. 94 ff. ‘ + 150, 7 (1904) p. 120 f. . + 3047 8 (1905) p. 155 fl. 3219 uster, Les Juzfs, II. p p. 327 320,
aibel, Epigrammata Graeca : No. 460 . A ᾿ Ε QI, 730. ᾿ . - Oly
1028 . . 1425 Keil and von Premerstein, Bevicht εἶδον eine dvitte Reise in Lydien :
. 18 ff. 2 311,
lo. 42 4522 Latyschev, Inscriptiones Antiquae :
I. No. 33 ὲ 376,
21 a6-28 88,
22eatt. 310,
246 3786
47 et. + 3786
II. No. 27 . 363,
46, - 3786
52 . 3214
5219-15 + 102,
53 1025, 3219
358 + 363,
400 321
IV. No. 7171. 3624
200 363,
202 ᾿ . 3637
Le Bas, fies, 2039, 2041. 417
INDEX
Le Bas-Waddington, No. 860,, δι Lefebvre, Recueit No. 297 . 433: Tepeins, Monum: aegypt. inscr. es
114 aaa Ephemeris fiir sem. Be graphik Lp. 85. 3635 I. p. 100 . 3054 Magnesia a. M., Die I nschvifien von, herausg. von O. Kern:
No. 10524 . . ὃ 106,
157b . . . + 347.
Michel, ecueil ᾧ >
No. genet Il44 Milet, Brgehnisce (see Ρ. 4, n. 6):
Heft 2, p. 101 f 3746
Heft 3, No. 134astt. 1149
: 134 att. 121,
149 μι, I146
150, 114 Monteverde zu Rom, Inschviften a jidischen Katakombe am, herausg.
von N. Miller : Nos. 35, 98, 113, 123, 152 ον 440, No. 145 447-450 Olympia, Inschviften von, No. >
44 Paton and Hicks, The π᾿.
of Cos:
No. 29 . ; . 3716 3276 92. : . 3454 3901: . 3717 Pergamon, Die i: nschriften von,
herausg. von M. Frankel : No. 186. 7 Η - 8% 333 - 6 278, 339 . ‘ a . 278, 358. 4 x Q0,4 374 . : . > 340. 374 Band Ὁ - 3604, 374 Bu a» Dig 36: 381. 3471 459 + 312, 52310 3469, 3491 523131 3463 587 . 278, 604 3158
Priene, Inschriften von, herausg. von Ἐς Frhr. Hiller von Gaertringen :
No. 5059. ‘ ᾿ « 12049
59sat. υ ν 12049
8246 ‘ ᾧ 106,
1051-0 366
10590 - 3471
TO5 aot. 3455, 366
T1755 : Ε . 310,
1375 - ὃ 5 ἥ 86
Ι0581 106,
31: 2952
Ramsay, Recent Discovevize = }
Ρ. 370 ff. . + 435 ff. Reisen im stidwestlichen K leinasien :
II. p. 36, No. 58 I14,
IL. pp. 76-135 - =. 6. 2949
INDEX
Retsen im stidwestlichen Kleinasien : II. p. 159, No. 187 114, II. p. 166, No. 193. nee IT. p. 180, No. 231
Revue des Etudes Juives oo. Ἢ"
- (1919--20ὴ Schiirer, Geschichte des 74. “Wales 111. p. 46. » 157 IIL. p. 27, ὁ p. 551. 3204 111. «1184 Sitzungsberichte der Berliner Aka-
demie :
1902, p. 1696 352, p. 1098 . ἃ . 303) “Waddington 3,2720a . »  Ior Wiegand, Bericht VII. B. 54 3718 Zolotas, p. 231 1. . 12049
_D. Papyri AND PARCHMENTS The Amherst Papyri:
No. 3. 471, 205 ff. 66 II, ‘ ᾿ . 8δόᾳ 131-135 236,, εν Ι9Ι
Annales du Service des Antiquités ve “lV'Egypte, 18:
No. 3 3 ‘ : + 1ό3ς
7 ξ ᾿ ὃ . 152 ff.
. 162 ff.
13 Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung, 6, p. 1ff. (London fragment of a
mime) . . 5 . 3365 Berliner Griechische Urkunden :
No. 15 I. τὸ f. 2705. 2 4 : . 2117 37, ὦ ᾿ : . 170, 55 1110 : 18519 6414 18510 726 és ᾿ . 119
Ior. ὃ : . 3344 103 ᾿ : ᾿ 89 140ᾳ4χι.. : ᾿ " 843 179 3344 Ἔβινς 119 272: 3344 333 18510 3441 - THO, 362 Va 1977 423 180, 432 Tyr 1195 522 1347 597, - : - 945 6or. : 5 2340 632 ᾿ ᾿ . 184, - 664 Ε δ ἐ . 3315 66511, ᾿ ὃ . 865 715 Ig . : + 741 747 Vee - : τ 86, 748 (tw + 2695, 3413 5181 . 1172: ζ1}. . 186, 815. + 1722 846 1347, 187, 888,, . ‘ ὃ - I1Q6
531 Berliner Griechische Urkunden :
No. 9129, - 7 3 δ, 81, IO7Qaot. « ᾿ χ . 85 10794 - ᾿ : . 120, 1197 i . x + 361g 1201 . . . + 362, 1203-1209. ὃ + 235, 9859 + 789
Bremen Papyri No. 18 . 116 Bulletin de 1’Institut - frangais
d’archéol. orient. VI., Le Caire, 1908. - 3731 Cairo Papyri No. 10735 421) 430-434 Catalogue of Coptic MSS. in the John Rylands Library, No. 461. 2351 Catalogue of Greek Papyri in the John Rylands Library,
Μοὶ. 11... Elephantine- Papyri bearb. von vey Rubensohn No.1 . a 39) Faytm Towns and their Papyri : No. 2 (Swoboda) . ᾿ 43 0355 - ᾿Ξ ᾿ + 3673 108. τ ᾿ - °1344 110-123 298, 1121. ὃ " . 188,, “τόρ. 188, 11896 298, T1Q9a. a 298, 133. Ἐ ν᾽ . 90) 139. . 18549 Flinders Petrie PapyriI IL. No. 395. . " 369 Florence Papyri : No. 61 i 269 f. ΟἹ soft 2604 Ol gst. « . 3334 99 - -« 190,
Geneva Papyri:
No. 16. ᾿ Ξ . 271 23st. + ᾿ : . 81, 45-65 Ξ 218,
Giessen Papyri :
No. 1713 - . Ε . 188,ς
2 .- 367.
5. . . . 651/20 : i . 38 Gradenwitz Papyri :
No. 1 e δ 3245
2 . . : ν 368, Grenfell zane Series II.
No. 73 τ . 213 ff.
Griechische Τονίο aus oc Αργρίοη, herausg. von P. M. Meyer (I. Papyri in Berlin University New Testa- ment Seminar) :
No. 6 . : : . 365
20 Ἢ " . 1844, 186, Hamburg Papyri:
I. No. 4 _ . 2 102,
10, ἃ ‘ . 189,
14. 3659
532
Heidelberg Papyri, Unpublished : Provisional No. 8c 3345 22. . 236, τ . . 232:
ἘθθεΙβετε Papyri, "Teroflenttiibuncen
No. 5 405, 6 . ᾿ 47». 215 Ἕ, 2304 Herculaneum rolls : No. 1044 118 Hibeh Papyri : No. 54 164 ff 82 yt. 875, 208, 975 - 2 11Ὶ Papyvi Iandanae : . No. 6 ᾿ : - 48, II. No. 12 : : 1491 Jena Papyri No. 1 ες 48,
Journal of Hellenic Studies : 35 (1915) ΒΡ. 22-65 e
: 331 Journal of t > Victoria Insti-
tute, London : 44 (1912) p. 76. 187, Leipzig Papyri, edited by L. Mitteis, Νο.9.70.᾽. - : ΟΙς, 100g Leyden Papyri ἑ Ti, : ᾿ : : 1246 V. Vilas 1373
Lille Papyri : : No.
3 London (Brit. Mus.) Papyri [See ae Archiv, Grenfell, ee
No. 244 83, 46.148. . a ἣν 142 46 get : 1373 4644: ἃ ᾿ + 302 : : : Ζ2ϊς T2T goat. 1373 I2Logete. : z + 306 124. ὃ - 93, 456, 233. - 3. 348, 256 3771 336 + 3344 417 216-221 713 463, 213 ff. 854 . 1748. 904 + 2351 904 χει. . 270 1. 1460, 1461 214, Vol. IT. pp. 267-307 . 218, Mélanges Nicole,
Ῥ. 58 ff. 2355 Memorie dell’ Instituto di Corrispon- denza Archeologica 2, p. 440
Munich Papyri, Archiv 1, at
p. 481 8. 3524 The Oxyrhyachus’ Papyri
No. 32 . 197-200
33 verso ily : . 86,
3758. . 3537
48. Ἶ φ» 3275
49. : - - 3270
53." . ᾿ + 272%
INDEX
The Oxyrhynchus Papyri:
_ No. 71 ἴω 11 924, 931 92 ὁ i + 90g 93. ᾿ ᾿ + 909
110 : 3515 1136: 208, T1397 + IE%G 115 . 176 ff. 116 1772 116¢¢ 208, TIO 4, 208, 119 201-204 1195, 14 2174 11949 85 121 123 128, 188,, 209 240, 237 239s 246 172 ff., 354 20615 3342 269 » 3315 280, 81 (§ 3) 36215 3342 3634 3342 4855: . : 119, 489517 - . - 834 50919 ὃ Γ . 86, 523. : . . 351g 654. - 41g, 425-429 655. Ἶ : . 414 656 «. ἧ . Η͂ 424 657. Ν . . 425 658 . 3 é «46g 722 : 3279 7421: + {τὸς 14. 2 ee 3840. . ᾽ 41ς 845. Z : + 42 846. . Ἵ “428 847 . ἢ ᾿ . 42ς 848. . ‘ ες 428 849. . . ΣΟ. ἥδε 850 : . + 426 851 i ὃ - 42ς 886. : ὃ . 123 903 8 ‘ 135 99387 2145 949% - 1235 1021 345ς Ιτογορ,. . 308, το. : : - 453 1143 : 3533 1205, . Ε ὃ 321. 124,2. ; ὦ + 484 1296 i ὡ 204, 1380 75s: 1410 7433 . 3451 1464. . ; ‘ 46, 1786 © 431 Paris Great Magical Papyrus :
Leaf 33. 254-264
Line 1365. - ; ᾿ . 418 1809 " . . . 418 2106]. 418
8548. ὃ ὃ ἢ 85
δὲ
INDEX
Faris a EADY; Notices et extraits, 18,
No. 18. ὦ . Σ + 2343 He τ i 5 oe 83
. ᾧ . .E Passalacqua ‘Papyrus ‘ ΤᾺ Pubblicazioni della Societa Italiana per la ricerca dei Papiri greci e latini in Egitto: Papivi gveci
e latini, Vol. IV. No. 328 - - 156, 339 . + 1554 435 . 152-161 Reinach Papyri, No. 7 . 270), 3305 Revue Egyptologique I, fasc. 3-4 (1919), No. 2, p. 5 ff. 192-197 Pepin Papyri: No. ἣν . ᾿ ‘ 85 a 194 20 « 3249 TO jot. 98, 245° - 83 2816 197, 48otr - 3604 1165, 379, Vienna Magical Papyrus 4576 E. OstTRAcA Crum, Coptic Ostraca : No.29 . : 221-224 31 2235 34 223: 37 2239 39 2236 71 224-227 129 55s 522 300, Ad. 2236 Deissmann Collection : No. 17 35515 18 3551 22-25 3542 31 110 f, 32 IIOg 33 3556 36 3591 36a 3542 37 3542 39 3542 40 3551 44 3551 47° 3551 56 tar f. 57 200 59 3551 64 204 f. 70 3542 77 3551 86 3551 87). : 3551 Strassburg Ostraca : No. 203. 596 Wiesbaden Museum, fragment of iar. No. 15527 530
533 Wilcken, cients Ostvaka :
No. 402 3 10644 41. Fi ᾿ .- 106.4 413 ee 3541 414. ᾽ . 10644 415. ἑ Ν - 106, 416. 2 ᾿ 10644 417. : : - T0644 4:18. . - 10644 420. 3 - 1064,
1027 166 1038 3538 1071 124 1135 1176 1222 1248 1481 370,
F. Woopen TaBLetTs British Museum Add. MS.
37516 + 333s Bulletin de la Société Archéo- logique d’Alexandrie, No. 12 (1910), pp. 39 ff. 442-446 Revue Archéologique : 28 (1874) p. 248 100, 28 (1874) p. 249 100, 29 (1875) Ρ. 233 f. 124, G. Grass GOBLETS Berlin Museum, No. 11866 130 Curtis Collection . - 1314 von Gans Pe aa No. 212. 130 Sangiorgi, p. 131. Wiegand (Rendel Harris) Collection . ὲ . 1291.
H. Coins
(See also Index IV. s.v. Coins) Cohen I. 307, No. 403/4 Head, Hist. num.*, p. 863 Madden, Jewish Coinage, 247
3713 3454 252ς
I, ANCIENT AUTHORS (OTHER |
THAN BIBLICAL)
Acta Apostolorum Apocrypha, ed. Bonnet :
I. p. 68, Acta Petri 388,
II. 1, p. 772, Acta Andreae et Maitthiae ὦ 958
II. 1, Pp. 20994, Acta Johan- nis 5 . - 945 Acta Johannis 109 ὃ . 388, II. 2, p. 11849, Acta Thomae 1249 11. 2, p. 148 f., Acta Thomae 1375 II. 2, p. 212,4, Acta Thomae 124, II. 2, p. 271, Acta Thomae . 1375 Acta Mart. Sciht. . 2523, 3563 Aeschylus, Pers. 981 1225 Agathangelus 464, . 256,
Ambrosius, De Obitu  Theo- dosit, ο. 34 198,
534
A pophthegmata aki col. 105 C . 126,
Apuleius, Metam. x. 53: 1701 Metam. xi. 5 1373
Aristeas, Epistle of, 12. 3274 16. . ‘ : - 418 7. 7 : 5 . 418, 27. ; ξ ᾿ . 3273 33 - ᾿ 5 ἃ . 327ς 37 - - . 3278 193, 226 : Ἶ . 418, 229. . 3 : ες δὲ 284 1977
Aelataphianed Lysistrata, τοῦ 126
Artemidorus, 485. . 977 Athenaeus IV. 11, 133 D . 974
Aur, Vict. Caes., 3 3536 Bacchylides, 17(16) 1: : 20743 Boissonade, Anecdota 5, p. 166 349. Book of Jubilees, XX. 5 262, Clem. Alex.I.977 A. Ill; Clem. Rom. 1 Cor. xlvii. 3919 1 Cor, lv. 2 324, I Cor. lv. 6 » 418 I Cor. lix. 3 347 418 1 Cor. Ixiv. 416, 418 2 Cor.i.1 19407 Const. Apost. 3, . 109, Council of Ares Canon III. 221, Crates (Poetae philos. fr. 4,
p. 218, ed. Diels) 109, Cyril of Alexandria . 126, Demetrius, De elocutione (Her-
cher, p. 13) . 228,, 2965 Demetrius Phalereus, Typi
epistolares, No.5 . . 178s, 2 Dicke Thephiila, fol. 50, col. 2 420, Dio Chrysostom, Orv. 35: 15 336, Diodor. Histor. Bibl. 1 27 138
111. 36 . 163,
xiv. 8 ὃ 877 Diog. Laert. ‘VIL. 173-4. 554 Doctrina Jacobi nuper baptiz-
ati, 451) . 2179 Epictetus, ‘Diatribae, I. του ‘ 329, Epistle to Diognetus, v. 1 f. 3854
v.6 170 Epistolosvaphi Graecae, ed.
Hercher :
P. 259 2352 ῬΡιό0 9. . 2352 Euseb., Eccl. Hist. : IIT. xx. 3. 246, V. xxviii. 5 ὃ + 3494 VI. xvi. 3 " j ῇ 34a VI. xxv. 11 5 : A 708 VII. χχν. 2. 229 Eustathius of Thessalonica, Opuscula, Ῥ. 38, 1. 58 2102
Ἐν. Pseudo-Matthaei, xvii.2. 433 Ev. Thom. x. ᾿ . 41g
Ev. Thom. (Latin text) i i. . 43365 Greek Liturgies, ed. Swainson : PP. 84, 92, 110 . » 4584 Pp. 92 . . . . 460,
INDEX
Greg. Naz. I. 1248 C . 4332 Hermes Trismegistus, Poeman- der, 3115 . 83, Hermogenes, De invent. 3, 5:1. τὸς Herodotus, ii. 28 . : 1749 ii, 17t ἢ . 174ς Herondas, vi. το. ᾿ 82, Ignatian Epistles, Eph. 9,2 2153 Irenaeus, Contra genres, ἥ; 540Η.. 388, γξτοηι: onGal.i.12 78; Johannes Eleemon, Life of St. Tycho . 126, Johannes Moschi, Spiritual Meadow ξ 126, John Chrysostom : II. 362 BCD 433 Orat. 36 3492 on Rom. iii. 24 . 3275 unprinted sermon 433 John of Euboea, Sermo in con- cept. Deipavae, col. 1476 A 3654 Jordanes, Getica, 50 ‘ ᾿ 92ς Josephus, Anit. IV. viili.4 . 87, Antt, XIV. x. 21 ᾿ 4514 Antt. XV. 417 . é - 806 Bell, Jud. 11. 417 ᾿ ᾿ 80 Bell. Jud. V. 193 80, Bell. Jud. VI. 124 80, Bell. Jud. VII. x. τ 3554 Jubilees, Book of, xx. 5 262, Julian the Apostate . . 126, Ὁ, Julius Victor (Rhet. lat. min. ed. Halm, p. 448) . + 1679 Pseudo(?)-Justin, Cohortatio ad Gentiles, V.78 . 126, Justin Martyr, Apol. 1. 27 ff.. τόδ᾽ Dialogue with the Jou Try- pho, c. 14 : . 3725 C. 52 + 3725 Logia fragment I. No. 4 é 41ς II. . ay 4 425-429 III. é Ν 414 Mart. Polycarpi, viii. 2. 3443 356 Martial, ii. 39 -. ‘é . 82, X. 72s . τ ᾿ 3625 Martyrium Theodoti + 219 Menander (het. Gr., ed. Spen- gel, 3, p. 377 fi.) 368, saan ay Tanchuma, Pikkudé, 260, Mishna Taanith, IIL. 6. 419
Moeris, p. 58 . 89, πὰ De pass. mul. _ Ρ. 47: » ὅδῳ ς
Νιοοαδα 7 in Athenaeus, IV.
11, 133 Ὁ 974
Nilus, in Ἔπβοιαο, Bibliotheca,
᾿ς P. 51336 983 Oribasius, Collectanea Med. L Ρ- 5446 8910 Origen IV: κοδδα, ed. de la Rue. 4379 Ovid, Met. viii. 620-625, 280¢ Met. ix. 675-9 170;
INDEX
Philo, ed. Mangey, Il. p. 467. 4524 Philodemus, περὶ παρρησίας 135; ᾿ ed. Olivieri, p. 52. 75a 760 Photius, Anfang des Lexikons, ed. Reitzenstein, p. 107 . 98, Bibliotheca, p. 51336 - 989 Pindar, Nem. 7, 152 4273 Ol. 10(11), 63. 5 . QTg Plato, Apology, 31B.. ~ 310, Epist. Νο. 13... : + 167 Gorgias, 447. 126 Legg. 5,746E . ; 209 Pliny, Nat. Hist. 5, 27. 312,
Nat. Hist. 1343-13 : 27: sis the oe, Epist. 10,
. » 19497 Epist. 10, τι Es » 2s Plutarch, Mor. II. p. 707 B 4332 Sympos. 4,6, . T16, Polybius, Hist. xviii. 31, 3705 Proclus, De forma epistolari : No. 12 ἡ IQIg 21 κ : i - 7% Ptolemaei Tetrabiblon, Scholia in . . ᾿ 765 Ruphus in Oribasius, Coil. Med. 1. p. 544ει:. . . 891
Scriptoves Hist. 456. Moa ath, 25
Shemoneh Esveh, 12
Solomon, Odes of, 23 3
Sophocles, Evis fragment
Sophronius . os
Soranus, ed. Rose, p. 174, 22 .
Sotion, Scriptores Rer. Mir. oe p. 183 .
Suetonius, Domit. 13
Nero, ‘Tacitus, Hist. ν. 5
Tanchuma, ria 3 Tertullian, A pol. 4: Test. XII. Pair. Test. Judae, 8 Levi, 3and 15 . Test. Salomonis, ed. Fleck, Ῥ. 133; ed. McCown, p. 58* Thomas Magister, p. 18,8 . Thucydides i. 133 ᾿ iii. 14 Vergil, asta, VI. 45. Vettius nue I. p. 4317
P. 11735
Cat. Codd. Astr. Gr. ν. 2: P. 5116. DP. 73a -
ΤΣ ΗΝ
