PRINTED BY THE ABERDEEN UNIVERSITY PRESS LIMITED,
FOR π & T. CLARK, EDINBURGH.
LONDON : SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, HAMILTON, KENT, AND CO. LIMITED. NEW YORK: CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS. TORONTO: THE PUBLISHERS’ SYNDICATE LIMITED.

. 4
Mea
ΕΙΠΕ so PUDLES
CONTRIBUTIONS CHIEFLY FROM PAPYRI AND INSCRIPTIONS TO THE HISTORY OF THE LANGUAGE, THE LITERATURE, AND THE RELIGION OF HELLENISTIC JUDAISM AND PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANITY
BY
Dr. G. ADOLF DEISSMANN
PROFESSOR OF THEOLOGY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF HEIDELBERG
WITH AN ILLUSTRATION IN THE TEXT
Authorised Translation
INCORPORATING DR. DEISSMANN’S MOST RECENT CHANGES AND ADDITIONS BY
ALEXANDER GRIEVE, M.A. (Ep1y.), D.Pxin. (Lirs.)
MINISTER OF THE SOUTH UNITED FREE CHURCH, FORFAR i <a / WA U {
EDINBURGH T & T. CLARK, 38 GEORGE STREET 1901
> Ἂν c ,ὔ Lal / 5» , 9 / 4, εἰ δὲ ἡ διακονία τοῦ θανάτου ἐν γράμμασιν ἐντετυπωμένη λίθοις Ν Ν ἐγενήθη ἐν δόξῃ, ὥστε μὴ δύνασθαι ἀτενίσαι τοὺς υἱοὺς ᾿Ισραὴλ εἰς τὸ “ “-“ Ν πρόσωπον Μωΐσέως διὰ τὴν δόξαν τοῦ προσώπου αὐτοῦ τὴν καταργουμένην,
πῶς οὐχὶ μᾶλλον ἡ διακονία τοῦ πνεύματος ἔσται ἐν δόξῃ ;
CONTENTS.
PAGE PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION - β Α vii EXTRACT FROM THE PREFACE TO Bibelstudien Η ἃ 5 : ; ix TRANSLATOR’S NOTE ὃ ᾿ ‘ 3 5 : ᾿ 3 F Say, gear ABBREVIATIONS Ξ ‘5 ‘ - 3 ; : : : XV I. PROLEGOMENA TO THE BiBLicAL LETTERS AND E:PISTLES Β 5 1 II. ConrTRIBUTIONS TO THE HistoRY OF THE LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE 4 a 2 = : 3 61 111. FurtHER CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE HISTORY OF THE LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE . ; ‘ 3 ᾿ Ε F ᾿ ΠΡ ees Ly (at Introductory Remarks . : : 3 : : : : ΕΒ (i.) Notes on the Orthography . 3 Ξ : : : : Be altel 1. Variation of Vowels 3 = ὁ : ᾿ ᾿ Ἂ : 181 2. Variation of Consonants : . F : ‘ : a0 195 (ii.) Notes on the Morphology . : Σ ἦ : : : . 186 1, Declension . : : ᾿ Ἴ Ὰ ᾿ ἢ Ξ ; 186 2. Proper Names é : : : : : : : 5 als 3. Verb ; ; : : : Ἶ : , : : Ae alts?) (iii.) Notes on the Vocabulary and the Syntax : - : os IGE! 1. So-called Hebraisms . ‘ : : : ὲ A ᾿ 194 2. So-called Jewish-Greek “ Biblical” or “New Testament ”’ Words and Constructions . : : : : . 198 3. Supposed Special ‘ Biblical” or “ον Testament ’’ Mean- ings and Constructions : : : : . 223 4. Technical Terms . Ξ ὃ : , ; : , oh 0288) 5. Phrases and Formule . : : : Z ; : an 248 6. Rarer Words, Meanings and Constructions . ; : . 256 IV. AN EpigrRaPHIC MEMORIAL OF THE SEPTUAGINT . : Ἶ | 5269) V. ΝΟΤΕΒ on somME BisnicaL Persons AND NAMES. : F Bi ΘΟ 1. Heliodorus . Ὲ A : : : j : i = Bt) 2. Barnabas 3 5 F 3 ᾿ : ; Ἂ : 1 S307 3. Manaen 5 : s : i : 5 : 4 ko 4. Saulus Paulus 3 ξ Ὰ ἃ : Ἶ ; 1 1315
(v)
vl CONTENTS. VI. GREEK TRANSCRIPTIONS OF THE TETRAGRAMMATON : : : VII. SPIcILEGIUM . : : 0 ᾿ . : > : - δ
INDEXES .
1. The Chronological Statement in the Prologue to Jesus
Sirach . . ὃ . . : 5 5 . .
2. The Supposed Edict of Ptolemy IV. Philopator against the
Egyptian Jews . . : . . . .
3. The ‘‘ Large Letters” and the “Marks of Jesus’ in Galatians 6 . 5 - : : - :
. A Note to the Literary History of Second Peter . . .
5. White Robes and Palms : ; Z : ; 4 :
ns
AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION.
Having been honoured by a request to sanction an English translation of my Bibelstudien and Neue Bibelstudien, 1 have felt it my duty to accede to the proposal. It seems to me that investigations based upon Papyri and Inscriptions are specially calculated to be received with interest by English readers.
For one thing, the richest treasures from the domain of Papyri and Inscriptions are deposited in English museums and libraries ; for another, English investigators take premier rank among the discoverers and editors of Inscriptions, but particularly of Papyri ; while, again, it was English scholarship which took the lead in utilising the Inscriptions in the sphere of biblical research. Further, in regard to the Greek Old Testament in particular, for the investigation of which the Inscriptions and Papyri yield valuable material (of which only the most inconsiderable part has been utilised in the following pages), English theologians have of late done exceedingly valuable and memorable work. In confirmation of all this I need only recall the names of F. Field, B. P. Grenfell, ΠΡΟ BH. 1, ΟΞ, A: 5. Hunt, F. G. Kenyon, J. P. Mahaffy, W. R. Paton, W. M. Ramsay, H. A. Redpath, H. B. Swete, and others hardly less notable.
Since the years 1895 and 1897, in which respec- (vil)
Vill AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION.
tively the German Bibelstudien and Neue Bibelstudien were published, there has been a vast increase of available material, which, again, has been much more accessible to me as a Professor in the University of Heidelberg than it was during my residence at Herborn. I have so far availed myself of portions of the more recent discoveries in this English edition ; but what remains for scholars interested in such investigations is hardly less than enormous, and is being augmented year by year. I shall be greatly pleased if yet more students set themselves seriously to labour in this field of biblical research.
In the English edition not a few additional changes have been made; I must, however, reserve further items for future Studies. With regard to the entries κυριακός (p. 217 ff.), and especially ἱλαστήριον (p. 124 ff), I should like to make express reference to the articles Lord’s Day and Mercy Seat to be contributed by me to the Hucyclopedia Biblica.
Finally, I must record my heartiest thanks to my translator, Rev. Alexander Grieve, M.A., D. Phil., Fortar, for his work. With his name I gratefully associate the words which once on a time the trans- lator of the Wisdom of Jesus Sirach applied with ingenuous complacency to himself: πολλὴν ἀγρυπνίαν καὶ ἐπιστήμην προσενεγκάμενος.
ADOLF DEISSMANN.
HEIDELBERG, 27th December, 1900.
FROM THE PREFACE TO THE GERMAN EDITION,
bible Studies is the name I have chosen for the following investigations, since all of them are more or less concerned with the historical questions which the Bible, and specially the Greek version, raises for scientific treatment. I am not, of course, of the opinion that there is a special biblical science. Science is method: the special sciences are distin- guished from each other as methods. What is designated ‘Biblical Science” were more _fitly named ‘“ Biblical Research”. The science in ques- tion here is the same whether it is engaged with Plato, or with the Seventy Interpreters and the Gospels. Thus much should be self-evident.
A well-disposed friend who understands some- thing of literary matters tells me that it is hardly fitting that a younger man should publish a volume of “Studies”: that is rather the part of the ex- perienced scholar in the sunny autumn of life. To this advice I have given serious consideration, but I am still of the opinion that the hewing of stones is very properly the work of the journeyman. And in the department where I have laboured, many a block must yet be trimmed before the erection of the edifice can be thought of. But how much still remains to
do, before the language of the Septuagint, the relation (1x)
Χ FROM THE PREFACE TO THE GERMAN EDITION.
to it of the so-called New Testament Greek, the history of the religious and ethical conceptions of Hellenic Judaism, have become clear even in outline only ; or before it has been made manifest that the religious movement by which we date our era origin- ated and was developed in history—that is, in con- nection with, or, it may be, in opposition to, an already- existent high state of culture! If the following pages speak much about the Septuagint, let it be remem- bered that in general that book is elsewhere much too little spoken of, certainly much less than was the case a hundred years ago. We inveigh against the Rationalists—often in a manner that raises the sus- picion that we have a mistrust of Reason. Yet these men, inveighed against as they are, in many respects set wider bounds to their work than do their critics. During my three years’ work in the Seminariwm Philippinum at Marburg, I have often enough been forced to think of the plan of study in accordance with which the bursars used to work about the middle of last century. Listen to a report of the matter such as the following :—'
“With regard to Greek the legislator has laid particular stress upon the relation in which this language stands to a true understanding of the N.T. How reasonable, therefore, will those who can judge find the recommendation that the Septuagint (which,
'Cf. the programme (of the superintendent) Dr. Carl Wilhelm Robert:
. announces that the Literary Association . . . shall be duly opened... . on the 27th inst. . . . [Marburg] Miiller’s Erben und Weldige, 1772, p. 13. That the superintendent had still an eye for the requirements of practical life is shown by his remarks elsewhere. For example, on page 7 f., he good- naturedly asserts that he has carried out ‘‘in the most conscientious manner ”’ the order that “the bursars shall be supplied with sufficient well-prepared
food and wholesome and unadulterated beer”. The programme affords a fine glimpse into the academic life of the Marburg of a past time.
FROM THE PREFACE TO THE GERMAN EDITION. ἘΠ
on the authority of an Ernesti and a Michaelis, is of the first importance as a means towards the proper understanding of the N.T.), has been fixed upon as a manual upon which these lectures must be given! And how much is it to be wished that the bursars, during the year of their study of this book, should go through such a considerable part of the same as may be necessary to realise the purposes of the legislator !”
I am not bold enough to specify the time when academical lectures and exercises upon the Septua- gint will again be given in Germany.' But the coming century is long, and the mechanical conception of science is but the humour of a day!. .
I wrote the book, not as a clergyman, but as a Privatdocent at Marburg, but I rejoice that I am able, as a clergyman, to publish it.
G. ADOLF DEISSMANN.
HERBORN: DEPARTMENT OF WIESBADEN, 7th March, 1895.
11, Additional note, 1899: Professor Dr. Johannes Weiss of Marburg has announced a course upon the Greek Psalter for the Summer Session, 1899 ; the author lectured on the Language of the Greek Bible in Heidelberg in the Winter Session of 1897-98.
ese aa τ) it ΑΗ ὃ eae
τ

TRANSLATOR’S NOTE.
In addition to the supplementary matter specially contributed to the present edition by the Author, the translation shows considerable alterations in other respects. Not only has the smaller and later volume, Neue Bibelstudien, 1897, found a place in the body of the book, but the order of the Articles has been all but completely changed. It has not been thought necessary to furnish the translation with an index of Papyri, etc., more especially as the larger Bibel- studien had none; but there has been added an index of Scripture texts, which seemed on the whole more likely to be of service to English readers in general. The translator has inserted a very few notes, mainly concerned with matters of translation.
For the convenience of those who may wish to consult the original on any point, the paging of the German edition has been given in square brackets, the page-numbers of the Neue Bibelstudien being distinguished by an N. In explanation of the fact that some of the works cited are more fully described towards the end of the book, and more briefly in the earlier pages, it should perhaps be said that a large portion of the translation was in type, and had been revised, before the alteration in the order of the Articles had been decided upon.
The translator would take this opportunity of (xi)
XIV TRANSLATOR 5. NOTE.
expressing his most cordial thanks to Professor Deissmann, who has taken the most active interest in the preparation of the translation, and whose painstaking revision of the proofs has been of the highest service. A word of thanks is also due to the printers, The Aberdeen University Press Limited, for the remarkable accuracy and skill which they have uniformly shown in the manipulation of what was often complicated and intricate material.
ALEXANDER GRIEVE.
FORFAR, 21st January, 1901.
THE PRINCIPAL
AAB. = Abhandlungen der Konig- lichen Akademie der Wissen- schaften zu Berlin.
Benndorf u. Niemann, see p. 157, note 1.
BU, = Aegyptische Urkunden aus den Koeniglichen Museen zu Berlin, Berlin, 1892 ff.
CIA. = Corpus Inscriptionum Atti- carum.
CIG. = Corpus Inscriptionum Grae- carum.
CIL. = Corpus Inscriptionum Latin- arum.
Clavis*, see p. 88, note 5.
Cremer, see p. 290, note 2.
DAW. = Denkschriften der K. K. Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Wien.
Dieterich (A.), see p. 322, note 8.
Dittenberger, see p. 93, note 2.
DLZ. = Deutsche Literaturzeitung.
Fick-Bechtel, see p. 310, note 4.
Field, see p. 284, note 2.
Fleck. Jbb. = Fleckeisen’s Jahrbiicher.
Frankel, see p. 84, note 2.
GGA. = Gdéttingische gelehrte An- zeigen.
HApAT’, = Kurzgetasstes exegetisches Handbuch zu den Apocryphen des A.T., 6 Bde., Leipzig, 1851-60.
Hamburger, see p. 271, note.
ΗΟ. = Hand-Commentar zum N.T.
Hercher, see p. 4, note 1.
Humann u. Puchstein, see p. 309, note 1.
IGrSI., see p. 200, note 1.
IMAe., see p. 178, note 5.
Kennedy, see p. 213, note 1.
Kenyon, see p. 323, note 1.
Lebas, see Waddington.
Leemans, see p. 322, note 6.
Letronne, Recherches, see p. 98, note 3. -- Recueil, see p. 101, note 6.
Lumbroso, Recherches, see p. 98, note 2.
Mahaffy, see p. 336, note 1.
Meisterhans, see p. 124, note 1.
Meyer = H. A. W. Meyer, Kritisch exegetischer Kommentar tiber das N.T.
Notices, xviii. 2, see p. 283, note 3.
ABBREVIATIONS.
Parthey, see p. 322, note 5.
Paton and Hicks, see p. 131, note 1.
PER., see p. 179, note 2.
Perg., see p. 178, note 4.
Peyron (A.), see p. 88, note 1.
R-H?= Real-Encyclopidie fiir protest. Theologie und Kirche von Herzog, 2. Aufl., Tieipzig, 1877 ff.
Schleusner = J. F., Novus Thesaurus philologico-criticus sive lexicon in LXX et reliquos interpretes grae- cos ac scriptores apocryphos Y. T., 5 voll., Lipsiae, 1820-21.
| Schmid (W.), see p. 64, note 2.
Schmidt (Guil.), see p. 291, note 1.
Schiirer, see p. 335, note 2.
Swete = The Old Testament in Greek according to the Septuagint, edited by H. B. Swete, 3 voll., Cambridge,
1887-94.
| Thesaurus=H. Stephanus, Thesaurus
| Graecae Linguae, edd. Hase, etc.,
Paris, 1831-65.
| Thayer, see p. 176, note 3.
ThLZ. = Theologische Literaturzei- tune.
Tromm. = Abrahami Trommii concor- dantiae graecae versionis vulgo dictae LXX interpretum ..., 2 tomi, Amstelodami et Trajecti ad Rhenum, 1718.
TU, = Texte und Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der altchristlichen Literatur.
Waddington, see p. 93, note 1.
| Wessely, see p. 322, note 7.
| Wetstein, see p. 350, note 1.
| Winer’, or Winer-Liinemann = G. B.
Winer, Grammatik des neutesta-
| mentlichen Sprachidioms, 7 Aufl. von G. Liinemann, Leipzig, 1867. (9th English edition, by W. F. Moulton, Edinburgh, 1882 = 3rd German edition.]
Winer-Schmiedel = the same work, Sth Aufl. neu bearbeitet von P. W. Schmiedel, Géttingen, 1894 ff.
ZAW. = Zeitschrift fiir die alttesta- mentliche Wissenschaft.
ZKG. = Zeitschrift fiir Kirchenge- schichte.

(xv)


if
PROLEGOMENA TO THE BIBLICAL LETTERS. AND EPISTLES.
γίνεσθε δόκιμοι τραπεζῖται.

PROLEGOMENA TO THE BIBLICAL LETTERS AND EPISTLES.
iu
1. Men have written letters ever since they could write at all. Who the first letter-writer was we know ποῦ. But this is quite as it should be: the writer of a letter accom- modates himself to the need of the moment; his aim is a personal one and concerns none but himself,—least of all the curiosity of posterity. We fortunately know quite as little who was the first to experience repentance or to offer prayer. The writer of a letter does not sit in the market- place. A letter is a secret and the writer wishes his secret to be preserved ; under cover and seal he entrusts it to the reticence of the messenger. The letter, in its essential idea, does not differ in any way from a private conversation ; like the latter, it is a personal and intimate communication, and the more faithfully it catches the tone of the private con- versation, the more of a letter, that is, the better a letter, it is. The only difference is the means of communication. We avail ourselves of far-travelling handwriting, because
1 Τῦ appears sufficiently naive that Tatian (Or. ad Graec., p. 115. Schwartz) and Clement of Alexandria (Strom. i. 16, p. 364, Potter) should say, following the historian Hellanikos, that the Persian queen Atossa (6th-5th cent. B.c.) was the discoverer of letter-writing. For it is in this sense that we should understand the expression that occurs in both, viz., ἐπιστολὰς συντάσσειν, and not as collecting letters together and publishing them, which R. Bentley (Dr. Rich. Bentley’s Dissertation on the Epistles of Phalaris, London, 1699, p. 535 f., German edition by W. Ribbeck, Leipzig, 1857, p. 532) considers to be also possible; cf. M. Kremmer, De catalogis hewrematum, Leipzig, 1890, p. 15.


4 BIBLE STUDIES. [190, 191
our voice cannot carry to our friend: the pen is employed because the separation by distance does not permit a téte-d- téte.! A letter is destined for the receiver only, not for the public eye, and even when it is intended for more than one, yet with the public it will have nothing to do: letters to parents and brothers and sisters, to comrades in joy or sorrow or sentiment—these, too, are private letters, true letters. As little as the words of the dying father to his children are a speech—should they be a speech it would be better for the dying to keep silent—just as little is the letter of a sage to his confidential pupils an essay, a literary produc- tion; and, if the pupils have learned wisdom, they will not place it among their books, but lay it devoutly beside the picture and the other treasured relics of their master. The form and external appearance of the letter are matters of indifference in the determination of its essential character. Whether it be written on stone or clay, on papyrus or parch- ment, on wax or palm-leaf, on rose paper or a foreign post- card, is quite as immaterial? as whether it clothes itself in the set phrases of the age; whether it be written skilfully or unskilfully, by a prophet or by a beggar, does not alter its special characteristics in the least. Nor do the particular contents belong to the essence of it. What is alone essential is the purpose which it serves: confidential per- sonal conversation between persons separated by dis- tance. The one wishes to ask something of the other, wishes to praise or warn or wound the other, to thank him or assure him of sympathy in joy—it is ever something personal that forces the pen into the hand of the letter- writer.? He who writes a letter under the impression that
1[Pseudo-] Diogenes, ep. 3 (EHpistolographi Graeci, rec. R. Hercher, Parisiis, 1873, Ὁ. 235).—Demetr., de elocut., 223 f. (Hercher, p. 13).—[Pseudo-] Proclus, de forma epistolari (Hercher, p. 6).
2 Cf. Th. Birt, Das antike Buchwesen in seinem Verhdltniss zur Lit- teratur, Berlin, 1882, top of p. 2.—It is most singular that Pliny (Hist. Nat., xiii. 13), and, after him, Bentley (p. 538 f.; German edition by Ribbeck, p. 532 f.), deny that the letters on wax-tablets mentioned by Homer are letters.
* Demetr., de elocut., 231 (Hercher, p. 14).
191, 199] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 5
his lines may be read by strangers, will either coquet with this possibility, or be frightened by it; in the former case he will be vain, in the latter, reserved ;! in both cases un- natural—no true letter-writer. With the personal aim of the letter there must necessarily be joined the naturalness of the writer’s mood; one owes it not only to himself and to the other, but still more to the letter as such, that he yield himself freely to it. So must the letter, even the shortest and the poorest, present a fragment
'Cic., Fam. 15,214, aliter enim scribimus quod eos solos quibus mittimus, aliter quod multos lecturos putamus. Cic., Phil. 2,7, quam multa ioca solent esse in epistulis quae prolata si sint inepta videantur ! quam muita seria neque tamen wllo modo dwolganda!—Johann Kepler wrote a letter to Reimarus Ursus, of which the latter then made a great parade in a manner painful to Kepler and Tycho Brahe. Having got a warning by this, Kepler de- termined that for the future: ‘‘scribam caute, retinebo exemplaria”. (Joamnus Kepleri astronomi opera omnia, ed. Ch. Frisch, i. [Frankfurt and Erlangen, 1858], p. 234; cf. C. Anschiitz, Ungedruckte wissenschaftliche Cor- respondenz zwischen Johar Kepler wnd Herwart von Hohenburg, 1599, Prague, 1886, p. 91 f.—The Palatinate physician-in-ordinary Helisius Rés- linus (+ 1616) says about one of his letters which had been printed without his knowledge: ‘‘I wrote it the day immediately following that on which I first beheld with astonishment the new star—on the evening of Tuesday, the 2/12 October ; I communicated the same at once in haste to a good friend in Strassburg. .... This letter (6 paginarwm) was subsequently printed without my knowledge or desire, which in itself did not concern me—only had I known beforehand, I should have arranged it somewhat better and ex- pressed myself more distinctly than I did while engaged in the writing of it” (Joamus Kepleri opp. omn., i., Ὁ. 666). Moltke to his wife, 3rd July, 1864: “1 have in the above given you a portrayal of the seizure of Alsen, which embodies no official report, but simply the observations of an eye- witness, which always add freshness to description. If you think it would be of interest to others as well, I have no objection to copies being taken of it in which certain personal matters will be left out, and myself not mentioned: Auer will put the matter right for you”’ (Gesammelte Schriften und Denkwiirdigkeiten des General-Feldmarschalls Grafen Helmuth von Moltke, vi. [Berlin, 1892], p. 408 f.). One notices, however, in this “letter,” that it was written under the impression that copies of it might be made. Compare also the similar sentiment (in the matter of diary-notes, which are essentially akin to letters) of K. von Hase, of the year 1877: “Tt may be that my knowledge that these soliloquies will soon fall into other hands detracts from their naturalness. Still they will be the hands of kind and cherished persons, and so may the thought of it be but a quickly passing shadow!” (Annalen meines Lebens, Leipzig, 1891, p. 271).

6 BIBLE STUDIES. [192, 193
of human naivete—beautiful or trivial, but, in any case, true.!
2. The letter is older than literature. As conversation between two persons is older than the dialogue, the song older than the poem, so also does the history of the letter reach back to that Golden Age when there was neither author nor publisher, nor any reviewer. Literature is that species of writing which is designed for publicity: the maker of literature desires that others will take heed to his work. He desires to be read. He does not appeal to his friend, nor does he write to his mother; he entrusts his sheets to the winds, and knows not whither they will be borne ; he only knows that they will be picked up and ex- amined by some one or other unknown to him and unabashed before him. Literature, in the truest essence of it, differs in no way from a public speech; equally with the latter it falls short in the matter of intimacy, and the more it attains to the character of universality, the more literary, that is to say, the more interesting it is. ΑἸ] the difference between them is in the mode of delivery. Should one desire to address, not the assembled clan or congregation, but the great foolish public, then he takes care that what he has to say may be carried home in writing by any one who wishes to have it so: the book is substituted for oral communication. And even if the book be dedicated to a friend or friends, still its dedication does not divest it of its literary character,—it does not thereby become a private piece of writing. The form and external appearance of the book are immaterial for the true understanding of its special character as a book: even its contents, whatever they be, do not matter. Whether the author sends forth poems, tragedies or his- tories, Sermons or wearisome scientific lucubrations, politi- cal matter or anything else in the world; whether his book is multiplied by the slaves of an Alexandrian bookseller, by patient monk or impatient compositor; whether it is pre- served in libraries as sheet, or roll, or folio: all these are as
1 Demetr., de elocut., 227 (Hercher, p. 13). Greg. Naz., ad Nicobulum (Hercher, p. 16).
199, 194] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 7
much matter of indifference as whether it is good or bad, or whether it finds purchasers or not. Book, literature, in the widest sense, is every written work designed by its author for the public.?
3. The book is younger than the letter. Even were the oldest letters that have come down to us younger than the earliest extant works of literature, that statement would still be true. For it is one which does not need the confirmation of historical facts—nay, 10 would be foolish to attempt to give such. The letter is perishable—in its very nature necessarily so; it is perishable, like the hand that wrote it, like the eyes that were to read it. The letter-writer works as little for posterity as for the public of his own time;” just as the true letter cannot be written over again, it exists in but a single copy. It is only the book that is multiplied and thus rendered accessible to the public, accessible, possibly, to posterity. Fortunately we possess letters that are old, extremely old, but we shall never gain a sight of the oldest of them all; it was a letter, and was able to guard itself and its secret. Among all nations, before the age of literature, there were the days when people wrote, indeed, but did not yet write books.’ In the same way people prayed, of course, and probably prayed better, long before there were any service-books ; and they had come near to God before they wrote down the proofs of His existence. The letter, should we ask about the essential character of it, carries us into the sacred solitude of simple, unaffected humanity; when we ask about its history, it directs us to the childhood’s years of the pre-literary man, when there was no book to trouble him.
1 Birt, Buchwesen, p. 2: “Similarly the point of separation between a private writing and a literary work was the moment when [in antiquity] an author delivered his manuscript to his own slaves or to those of a contractor in order that copies of it might be produced ”’.
2 A. Stahr, Aristotelia, i., Halle, 1830, p. 192 f.
3 Wellhausen, Israelitische und Jiidische Geschichte, p. 58: ‘ Already in early times writing was practised, but in documents and contracts only ; also letters when the contents of the message were not for the light of day or when, for other reasons, they required to be kept secret”. Hebrew litera- ture blossomed forth only later.

8 BIBLE STUDIES. [194, 195
4, When the friend has for ever parted from his comrades, the master from his disciples, then the bereaved bethink themselves, with sorrowful reverence, of all that the de- parted one was to them. The old pages, which the beloved one delivered to them in some blessed hour, speak to them with a more than persuasive force ; they are read and re- read, they are exchanged one for another, copies are taken of letters in the possession of friends, the precious fragments are collected: perhaps it is decided that the collection be multiplied—among the great unknown public there may be some unknown one who is longing for the same stimulus which the bereaved themselves have received. And thus it happens now and then that, from motives of reverent love, the letters of the great are divested of their confidential character: they are formed into literature, the letters subsequently become a book. When, by the Euphrates or the Nile, preserved in the ruins of some fallen civilisation, we find letters the age of which can only be computed by centuries and millenniums, the science of our fortunate day rejoices; she hands over the vener- able relics to a grateful public in a new garb, and so, in our own books and in our own languages, we read the reports which the Palestinian vassals had to make to Pharaoh upon their tablets of clay, long before there was any Old Testa- ment or any People of Israel; we learn the sufferings and the longings of Egyptian monks from shreds of papyrus which are as old as the book of the Seventy Interpreters. Thus it is the science of to-day that has stripped these private communications of a hoary past of their most peculiar characteristic, and which has at length transformed letters, true letters, into literature. As little, however, as some unknown man, living in the times of Imperial Rome, put the toy into the grave of his child in order that it should sometime be discovered and placed in a museum, just as little are the private letters which have at length been trans- formed into literature by publication, to be, on that account, thought of as literature. Letters remain letters whether oblivion hides them with its protecting veil, or whether now
195, 196] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 9
reverence, now science, or, again, reverence and science in friendly conspiracy, think it well to withhold the secret no longer from the reverent or the eager seeker after truth. What the editor, in publishing such letters, takes from them, the readers, if they can do anything more than spell, must restore by recognising, in true historical perspective, their simple and unaffected beauty.
5. When for the first time a book was compiled from letters,—it would be reverential love, rather than science, that made the beginning here—the age of literature had, of course, dawned long ago, and had long ago constructed the various literary forms with which it worked. That book, the first to be compiled from real letters, added another to the already existent forms. One would, of course, hardly venture to say that it forthwith added the literary letter, the epistle,' to the forms of published ltera- ture; the said book only gave, against its will, so to speak, the impetus to the development of this new literary ezdos.? The present writer cannot imagine that the composition and publication of literary treatises in the form of letters was anterior to the compilation of a book from actual letters. So soon, however, as such a book existed, the charming novelty of it invited to imitation. Had the in- vitation been rightly understood, the only inducement that should have been felt was to publish the letters of other venerable men, and, in point of fact, the invitation was not seldom understood in this its true sense. From almost every age we have received such collections of ‘‘ genuine,” ‘“‘real”’ letters—priceless jewels for the historian of the human spirit. But the literary man is frequently more of a literary machine than a true man, and thus, when the
1JIn the following pages the literary letter [Litteraturbrief] will continue to be so named: the author considers that the borrowed word appropriately expresses the technical sense.
2F,. Susemihl, Geschichte der griechischen Litteratur ὧν der Alexan- drinerzeit, ii., Leipzig, 1892, p. 579: ‘It may well be that the first impulse to this branch of authorship was given by the early collecting together, in the individual schools of philosophy, such as the Epicurean, of the genuine correspondence of their founders and oldest members ”’.
10 BIBLE STUDIES. [196, 197
first collection of letters appeared, it was the literary, rather than the human, interest of it which impressed him; the accidental and external, rather than the inscrutably strange inmost essence of it. Instead of rejoicing that his pur- blind eye might here catch a glimpse of a great human soul, he resolved to write a volume of letters on his own part. He knew not what he did, and had no feeling that he was attempting anything unusual ;! he did not see that, by his literary purpose, he was himself destroying the very possibility of its realisation; for letters are experiences, and experiences cannot be manufactured. The father of the epistle was no great pioneer spirit, but a mere para- graphist, a mere mechanic. But perhaps he had once heard a pastoral song among the hills, and afterwards at home set himself down to make another of the same: the wondering applause of his crowd of admirers confirmed him in the idea that he had succeeded. If then he had achieved his aim in the matter of a song, why should he not do the same with letters? And so he set himself down and made them. But the prototype, thus degraded to a mere pattern, mistrustfully refused to show its true face, not to speak of its heart, to this pale and suspicious-looking companion, and the result was that the epistle could learn no more from the letter than a little of its external form. If the true letter might be compared to a prayer, the epistle which mimicked it was only a babbling; if there beamed forth in the letter the wondrous face of a child, the epistle grinned stiffly and stupidly, like a puppet. |
But the puppet pleased; its makers knew how to bring it to perfection, and to give it more of a human appearance. Indeed, it happened now and then that a real artist occupied an idle hour in the fashioning of such an object. This, of course, turned out better than most others of a similar kind,
' Cf. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Aristoteles wnd Athen, ii., Berlin, 1893, p. 392: ‘‘ He [Isocrates] did not understand that the letter, as a con- fidential and spontaneous utterance, is well written only when it is written for reading, not hearing, when it is distinguished from the set oration κατ᾽ εἶδος. This judgment applies also to real, genuine letters by Isocrates.
197, 198] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 11
and was more pleasant to look at than an ugly child for instance; in any case it could not disturb one by its noise. A good epistle, in fact, gives one more pleasure than a worthless letter; and in no literature is there any lack of good epistles. They often resemble letters so much that a reader permits himself for the moment to be willingly deceived as to their actual character. But letters they are not, and the more strenuously they try to be letters, the more vividly do they reveal that they are ποῖ. Even the grapes of Zeuxis could deceive only the sparrows; one even suspects that they were no true sparrows, but cage-birds rather, which had lost their real nature along with their freedom and pertness ; our Rhine-land sparrows would not have left their vineyards for anything of the kind. Those of the epistle- writers who were artists were themselves most fully aware that in their epistles they worked at best artificially, and, in fact, had to do so. ‘The editor requests that the readers of this book will not forget the title of it: it is only a book of letters, letters merely relating to the study of theology. In letters one does not look for treatises, still less for treatises in rigid uniformity and proportion of parts. As material offers itself and varies, as conversation comes and goes, often as personal inclinations or incidental occur- rences determine and direct, so do the letters wind about and flow on; and I am greatly in error if it be not this thread of living continuity, this capriciousness of origin and circumstances, that realises the result which we desiderate on the written page, but which, of course, subsequently dis- appears in the printing. Nor can I conceal the fact that these letters, as now printed, are wanting just in what is perhaps most instructive, viz. the more exact criticism of particular works. There was, however, no other way of doing it, and I am still uncertain whether the following letters, in which the materials grow always the more special,
1 Von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Antigonos von Karystos (Philologische Untersuchungen, iv.), Berlin, 1881, p. 151, says, ‘‘ Such letters as are actually written with a view to publication are essentially different in character from private correspondence ”’.
12 BIBLE STUDIES. [198, 199
the more important, the more personal, are fit for printing at all. The public voice of the market-place and the confidential one of private correspondence are, and always continue to be, very different.” Herder, in these words, which are a classical description of the true idea of a letter, claims that his book has, in fact, the character of actual letters, but 15 nevertheless quite well aware that a printed (that 15, accord- ing to the context, a literary) letter is essentially different from a letter that is actually such.
It is easy to understand how the epistle became a favourite form of published literature in almost all literary nations. There could hardly be a more convenient form. The extraordinary convenience of it lay in the fact that it was, properly speaking, so altogether ‘‘ unliterary,” that, in fact, it did not deserve to be called a ‘“‘form”’ at all. One needed but to label an address on any piece of tittle- tattle, and lo! one had achieved what else could have been accomplished only by a conscientious adherence to the strict rules of artistic form. Neither as to expression nor contents does the epistle make any higher pretensions. The writer could, in the matter of style, write as he pleased, and the address on the letter became a protective mark for thoughts that would have been too silly for a poem, and too paltry for an essay. The epistle, if we disregard the affixed address, need be no more than, say a fewilleton or a causerie, The zenith of epistolography may always be looked upon as. assuredly indicating the decline of literature; literature be- comes decadent—Alexandrian, so to speak—and although epistles may have been composed and published by great creative spirits, still the derivative character of the move- ment cannot be questioned: even the great will want to gossip, to lounge, to take it easy for once. Their epistles may be good, but the epistle in general, as a literary pheno- menon, is light ware indeed.
6. Of collections of letters, bearing the name of well- known poets and philosophers, we have, indeed, a great
' Briefe, das Studium dev Theologie betreffend, Third Part, Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1790, Preface to the first edition, pp. i.-ili.
199, 200] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 13
profusion. Many of them are not ‘‘genuine’’; they were composed and given to the world by others under the pro- tection of a great name.’ A timid ignorance, having no true notion of literary usages, inconsiderately stigmatises one and all of these with the ethical term forgery ; it fondly imagines that everything in the world can be brought be- tween the two poles moral and immoral, and overlooks the fact that the endless being and becoming of things is generally realised according to non-ethical laws, and needs to be judged as an ethical adiaphoron. He who tremulously supposes that questions of genuineness in the history of literature are, as such, problems of the struggle between truth and falsehood, ought also to have the brutal courage to describe all literature as forgery. The literary man, as compared with the non-literary, is always a person under constraint; he does not draw from the sphere of prosaic circumstance about him, but places himself under the dominion of the ideal, about which no one knows better than himself that it never was, and never will be, real. The literary man, with every stroke of his pen, removes himself farther from trivial actuality, just because he wishes to alter it, to ennoble or annihilate it, just because he can never acknowledge it as it is. As a man he feels indeed that he is sold under the domain of the wretched ‘ object’’. He knows that when he writes upon the laws of the cosmos, he is naught but a foolish boy gathering shells by the shore of the ocean; he enriches the literature of his nation
‘The origin of spurious collections of letters among the Greeks is traced back to ‘‘the exercises in style of the Athenian schools of rhetoric in the earlier and earliest Hellenistic period,” Swsemihl, ii., pp. 448, 579. If some callow rhetorician succeeded in performing an exercise of this kind _ specially well, he might feel tempted to publish it. But it is not impossible that actual forgeries were committed for purposes of gain by trading with the great libraries, cf. Suwsemihl, ii., pp. 449 f.; Bentley, p. 9 f., in Ribbeck’s German edition, p. 81 ff.; A. M. Zumetikos, De Alewandri Olympiadisque epistularum fontibus et reliquiis, Berlin, 1894, p. 1.—As late as 1551, Joachim Camerarius ventured on the harmless jest of fabricating, ““ ad institutionem pucrilem,” a correspondence in Greek between Paul and the Presbytery of Ephesus (Th. Zahn, Geschichte des Neutestamentlichen Kanons, ii., 2, Erlangen and Leipzig, 1892, p. 565).
14 BIBLE STUDIES. [200, 201
by a Faust, meanwhile sighing for a revelation; or he is driven about by the thought that something must be done for his unbelief—yet he writes Discourses upon Religion. And thus he realises that he is entangled in the contradic- tion between the Infinite and the Finite,’ while the small prosperous folks, whose sleepy souls reck not of his pain, are lulled by him into the delightful dream that we only need to build altars to truth, beauty, and eternity in order to possess these things; when they have awaked, they can but reproach him for having deceived them. They discover that he is one of themselves; they whisper to each other that the sage, the poet, the prophet, is but a man after all —wiser, it may be, but not more clever, or better, than others. He who might have been their guide—not in- deed to his own poor hovel but to the city upon the hill, not built by human hands—is compensated with some polite-sounding phrase. The foolish ingrates! Literature presents us with the unreal, just because it subserves the truth; the literary man abandons himself, just because he strives for the ends of humanity; he is unnatural, just be- cause he would give to others something better than him- self. What holds good of lterature in general must also be taken into account in regard to each of its characteristic phenomena. Just as little as Plato’s Socrates and Schiller’s Wallenstein are ‘‘ forgeries,’ so little dare we so name the whole ‘‘pseudonymous’’? literature. We may grant at once, indeed, that some, at least, of the writings which go under false names were intentionally forged by the writers
1 Cf. the confession made by U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Aristoteles und Athen, i., Berlin, 1893, Preface, p. vi.: ‘“‘ The task of authorship demands an end attained—in irreconcilable antithesis to the investigations of science. The Phaedrus has taught us that the book in general is a pitiful thing as compared with living investigation, and it is to be hoped that we are wiser in our class-rooms than in our books. But Plato, too, wrote books; he spoke forth freely each time what he knew as well as he knew it, assured that he
would contradict himself, and hopeful that he would correct himself, next time he wrote.”’
* The term pseudonymous of itself certainly implies blame, but it has
become so much worn in the using, that it is also applied in quite an in- nocent sense.
901, 209] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 1g
of them; pseudonymity in political or ecclesiastical works is in every case suspicious, for no one knows better how to use sacred and sanctifying ends than does the undisciplined
instinct of monarchs and hierarchs, and the followers of
them. But there is also a pseudonymity which is innocent, sincere, and honest,' and if a literary product permits of any inferences being drawn from it respecting the character of the writer, then, in such a case of pseudonymity, one may not think of malice or cowardice, but rather of modesty and natural timidity. Between the genuine? and the pseudony- mous epistle there does not exist the same profound and essential difference as between the epistle and the letter. The epistle is never genuine in the sense in which the letter is ; 1t never can be so, because it can adopt the form of the letter only by surrendering the essence. An epistle of Herder, however like a letter it may look, is yet not a letter of Herder: it was not Herder the man, but Herder the theological thinker and author, that wrote it: it is genuine in an ungenuine sense—like an apple-tree which, flourishing in September, certainly has genuine apple blossoms, but which must surely be altogether ashamed of such in the presence of its own ripening fruits. Literary ‘‘ genuine- ness” is not to be confounded with genuine naturalness. Questions of genuineness in literature may cause us to rack our brains: but what is humanly genuine is never a problem
1 Cf. on this point specially Jiilicher, Hinleitung wm das N. T., p. 32 fi.
2 The discussion which occupies the remainder of this paragraph is one which may, indeed, be translated, but can hardly be transferred, into English. It turns partly on the ambiguity of the German word echt, and partly on a distinction corresponding to that which English critics have tried to establish between the words “genuine” and ‘“authentic’’—a long-vexed question which now practice rather than theory is beginning to settle. Echt means authentic, as applied, for instance, to a book written by the author whose name it bears; it also means genwine both as applied to a true record of experience, whether facts or feelings, and as implying the truth (that is the naturalness, spontaneity or reality) of the experience itself. The trans- lator felt that, in justice to the author, he must render echt throughout the passage in question by a single word, and has therefore chosen genuine, as representing, more adequately than any other, the somewhat wide con- notation of the German adjective.—Tr.
16 BIBLE STUDIES. [202, 203
to the genuine man. From the epistle that was genuine in a mere literary sense there was but a step to the fictitious epistle; while the genuine letter could at best be mimicked, the genuine epistle was bound to be imitated, and, indeed, invited to imitation. The collections of genuine letters indirectly occasioned the writing of epistles: the collections of genuine epistles were immediately followed by the litera- ture of the fictitious epistle.
ih:
7. In the foregoing remarks on questions of prin- ciple, the author has in general tacitly presupposed the literary conditions into which we are carried by the Graeco- Roman civilisation, and by the modern, of which that is the basis.!. These inquiries seem to him to demand that we should not summarily include all that has been handed down to us bearing the wide, indefinite name of letter, under the equally indefinite term Literature of letters (Brief- litteratur), but that each separate fragment of these in- teresting but neglected compositions be set in its proper place in the line of development, which is as follows—real letter, letter that has subsequently become literature, epistle, ficti- tious epistle. Should it be demanded that the author fill up the various stages of this development with historical references, he would be at a loss. It has been already in- dicated that the first member of the series, viz., the letter, belongs to pre-literary times: it 1s not only impossible to give an example of this, but also unreasonable to demand one. With more plausibility one might expect that some- thing certain ought to be procured in connection with the other stages, which belong in a manner to literary times,
' The history of the literature of “" letters”” among the Italian Humanists is, from the point of view of method, specially instructive. Stahr, Aristotelia, ii., p. 187 f., has already drawn attention to it. The best information on the subject is to be found in G. Voigt’s Die Wiederbelebung des classischen Alterthums oder das erste Jahrhundert des Humanismus, ii.*, Berlin, 1898, pp. 417-436.

208, 204] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 17
and, as such, can be historically checked. But even if the broad field of ancient ‘“‘letters’’ were more extensively cultivated than has hitherto been the case, still we could establish at best no more than the first known instance of a subsequent collection of real letters, of an epistle or of a fictitious epistle, but would not reach the beginnings of the literary movement itself. The line in question can only be drawn on the ground of general considerations, nor does the author see how else it could be drawn. No one will ques- tion that the real letter was the first, the fictitious epistle the last, link in the development; as little will any one doubt that the epistle must have been one of the intervening links between the two.1' The only uncertainty is as to the origin of the epistle itself; it, of course, presupposes the real letter, being an imitation of it; but that it presupposes as well the collection of real letters, as we think pro- bable in regard to Greek literature, cannot be established with certainty for the history of literature in general. Asa matter of fact, the epistle, as a form of literature, is found among the Egyptians at a very early period, and the author does not know how it originated there. The Archduke Rainer’s collection of Papyri at Vienna contains a poetical description of the town of Pi-Ramses, dating from the 12th century B.C., which is written in the form of a letter, and is in part identical with Papyrus Anastasi ITT. in the British Museum. This MS. ‘shows that in such letters we have, not private correspondence, but literary compositions, which must have enjoyed a wide circulation in ancient Egypt; it thus affords us valuable materials towards the characterisation of the literature of ancient Egypt”’.? Τί,
'Von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Antigonos von Karystos, Ὁ. 151: “1 cannot imagine that fictitious correspondence, as a species of literature, was anterior in time to genuine”.
2 J. Karabacek, Mittheilungen aus der Sammlung der Papyrus Erzherzog Ramer, i., Vienna, 1887, p. 51; cf. J. Krall, Guide-book of the Exhibition {of the Pap. Erzh. Rainer], Vienna, 1894, p. 32.—The author doubts whether the term literatwre should really be applied to the letters in cuneiform character which were published by Fried. Delitzsch (Beitriige zur Assyriologie, 1893 and 1894) under the title of ‘‘ Babylonisch-Assyrische Brieflitteratur’’.
2
18 BIBLE STUDIES. (204, 205
therefore, we can hardly say that the epistle first originated among the Greeks, yet, notwithstanding the above facts, we may assume that it might arise quite independently under the special conditions of Greek Literature, and that, in fact, it did so arise.
8. Now whatever theory one may have about the origin of the epistle among the Greeks, that question is of no great importance for the problem of the historian of literary phenomena in general, viz., the analysis into their con- stituent parts of the writings which have been transmitted to us as a whole under the ambiguous name of “letters”’. What is important in this respect are the various categories to which those constituent parts must be assigned in order that they may be clearly distinguished from each other. We may, therefore, ignore the question as to the origin of these categories—like all questions about the origin of such products of the mind, it is to a large extent incapable of any final solution; let it suffice that all these categories are represented among the ‘‘letters”’ that have been transmitted from the past. The usage of scientific language is, indeed, not so uniform as to render a definition of terms super- fluous. The following preliminary remarks may therefore be made; they may serve at the same time to justify the terms hitherto used in this book.
Above all, it is misleading merely to talk of letters, without having defined the term more particularly. The perception of this fact has influenced many to speak of the private letter in contradistinction to the literary letter, and this distinction may express the actual observed fact that the true letter is something private, a personal and con- fidential matter. But the expression is none the less in- adequate, for it may mislead. Thus B. Weiss,! for instance, uses it as the antithesis of the pastoral letter (Gemeindebrief) ; a terminology which does not issue from the essence of the letter, but from the fact of a possible distinction among those to whom it may be addressed. We might in the same way distinguish between the private letter and the family
1 Meyer, xiv.® (1888), p. 187.
205, 206] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 19
letter, 1.6., the letter which a son, for instance, might send from abroad to those at home. But it is plain that, in the circumstances, such a distinction would be meaningless, for that letter also is a private one. Or, take the case of a clergyman, acting as army chaplain in the enemy’s country, who writes a letter’ to his distant congregation at home; such would be a congregational letter—perhaps it is even read in church by the locum tenens ; but it would manifestly not differ in the shghtest from a private letter, provided, that is, that the writer’s heart was in the right place. The more pri- vate, the more personal, the more special it is, all the better a congregational letter will it be; a right sort of congrega- tion would not welcome paragraphs of pastoral theology— they get such things from the locwm tenens, for he is not long from college. The mere fact that the receivers of a letter are a plurality, does not constitute a public in the literary sense, and, again, an epistle directed to a single private individual is not on that account a private letter —it is literature. It is absurd, then, to define the specific character of a piece of writing which looks like a letter merely according to whether the writer addresses the re- ceivers in the second person singular or plural;? the dis- tinguishing feature cannot be anything merely formal (formal, moreover, in a superficial sense of that word), but can only be the inner special purpose of the writer. It is thus advisable, if we are to speak scientifically, to avoid the use of such merely external categories as congregational letter, and also to substitute for private letter a more accurate expression. As such we are at once confronted by the simple designation letter, but this homely term, in consideration of the in- definiteness which it has acquired in the course of centuries, will hardly suffice by itself; we must find an adjunct for it.
1 Cf. for instance the letter of K. Ninck to his congregation at Friicht, of the 1st September, 1870—from Corny; partly printed in F. Cuntz’s Karl Wilh. Theodor Ninck. Ein Lebensbild. 2nd edn., Herborn, 1891, p. 94 fi.
° This difference does not, of course, hold in modern English; we can hardly imagine a letter-writer employing the singular forms thou, thee. But the distinction does not necessarily hold in German either.—Tr.

20 BIBLE STUDIES. (206, 207
The term trwe letter is therefore used here, after the example of writers! who are well able to teach us what a letter is.
When a true letter becomes literature by means of its publication, we manifestly obtain no new species thereby. To the historian of literature, it still remains what it was to the original receiver of it—a true letter: even when given to the public, it makes a continual protest against its being deemed a thing of publicity. We must so far favour it as to respect its protest; were we to separate it in any way from other true letters which were fortunate enough never to have their obscurity disturbed, we should but add to the injustice already done to it by its being published.
A new species is reached only when we come to the letter published professedly as literatwre, which as such is altogether different from the first class. Here also we meet with various designations in scientific language. But the adoption of a uniform terminology is not nearly so im- portant in regard to this class as in regard to the true letter. One may call it literary letter,? or, as has been done above for the sake of simplicity, epistle—no importance need be attached to the designation, provided the thing itself be clear. The subdivisions, again, which may be inferred from the conditions of origin of the epistle, are of course unessen- tial; they are not the logical divisions of the concept epistle, but simply classifications of extant epistles according to their historical character, i.e., we distinguish between authentic and wnauthentic epistles, and again, in regard to the latter,
1K. Reuss, Die Geschichte der h. Schriften N. T.5§ 74, p. 70, uses the expression true letters, addressed to definite and particular readers. Vou Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Aristoteles wnd Athen, ii., p. 393; cf. p. 394: real letters ; rbid., p. 392, letters, ἐπιστολαί in the full sense of the word. The same author in Hin Weihgeschenk des Eratosthenes, in Nachrichten der Kgl. Gesell- schaft der Wissenschaften zu Gottingen, 1894, p. 5: true private letter.—Birt also uses—besides the designations private writing (Buchwesen, pp. 2, 20, 61, 277, 443) and incidental letter (pp. 61, 325)—the expression trwe correspondence (wirkliche Correspondenzen, Ὁ. 326). Similarly A. Westermann, De epi- stolarum scriptoribus graecis 8 progrr., i., Leipzig, 1851, p. 18, calls them ‘““veras epistolas, h. 6. tales, quae ab auctoribus ad ipsos, quibus inscribuntur, homines revera datae sunt’’.
* Von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Hin Weihgeschenk des Hratosthenes, Ὁ. 3.


207, 208] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 21
between innocent fabrications and forgeries with a ‘“‘ten- dency”;
Furnished with these definitions, we approach the im- mense quantity of written material which has been be- queathed to us by Graeco-Roman antiquity under the ambiguous term ἐπιστολαί, epistulae. The sheets which we have inherited from the bountiful past, and which have been brought into confusion by legacy-hunters and legal advisers, so to speak, perhaps even by the palsied but venerable hand of their aged proprietrix herself, must first of all be duly arranged before we can congratulate ourselves on their possession. In point of fact, the work of arrangement is by no means so far advanced as the value of the inheritance deserves to have 101 But what has already been done affords, even to the outsider, at least the superficial impres- sion that we possess characteristic representatives, from ancient times, of all the categories of ἐπιστολαί which have been established in the foregoing pages.
Int.
9. We can be said to possess true letters from ancient times—in the full sense of the word possess—only when we have the originals. And, in fact, the Papyrus discoveries of the last decade have placed us in the favourable position of being able to think of as our very own an enormous number of true letters in the original, extending from the Ptolemaic period till far on in medieval times. The author is forced to confess that, previous to his acquaintance with ancient Papyrus letters (such as it was—only in facsimiles), he had never rightly known, or, at least, never rightly realised within his own mind, what a letter was. Com- paring a Papyrus letter of the Ptolemaic period with a fragment from a tragedy, written also on Papyrus, and of
1 Among philologists one hears often enough the complaint about the neglect of the study of ancient ‘‘letters”. The classical preparatory labour of Bentley has waited long in vain for the successor of which both it
and its subject were worthy. It is only recently that there appears to have sprung up a more general interest in the matter.
29 BIBLE STUDIES.
about the same age, no one perceives any external dif- ference; the same written characters, the same writing material, the same place of discovery. And yet the two are as different in their essential character as are reality and art: the one, a leaf with writing on it, which has served some perfectly definite and never-to-be-repeated purpose in human intercourse; the other, the derelict leaf of a book, a fragment of literature.
These letters will of themselves reveal what they are, better than the author could, and in evidence of this, there follows a brief selection of letters from the Egyptian town of Oxyrhynchus, the English translation of which (from Greek) all but verbally corresponds to that given by Messrs. Gren- fell and Hunt in their edition of the Oxyrhynchus Papyri.' The author has selected such letters as date from the century in which our Saviour walked about in the Holy Land, in which Paul wrote his letters, and the beginnings of the New Testament collection were made.?
i Letter from Chaireas to Tyrannos.? A.D. 25-26.
‘““Chaireas to his dearest Tyrannos, many greetings. Write out immediately the lst of arrears both of corn and money for the twelfth year of Tiberius Caesar Augustus, as Severus has given me instructions for demand- ing their payment. I have already written to you to be firm and demand payment until I come in peace. Do not there- fore neglect this, but prepare the statements of corn and money from the . . . year to the eleventh for the presenta- tion of the demands. Good-bye.”
Address: “ΤῸ Tyrannos, dioiketes ”’.
1 The Oxyrhynchus Papyri, edited . . . by Bernard P. Grenfell and Arthur S. Hunt, Part I., London, 1898; Part II., London, 1899. For those who feel themselves more specially interested in the subject, a comparison with the original Greek texts will, of course, be necessary.
? The German edition of this work contains a Greek transcription, with annotations, of ten Papyrus letters (distinct from those given here) from Kgypt, of dates varying from 255 B.c. to the 2nd-3rd centuries a.p.
* The Oxyrhynchus Papyri, No. 291, ii., p. 291. Chaireas was strategus of the Oxyrhynchite nome. Tyrannos was διοικητής.
LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 23
i.
Letter of Recommendation from Theon to Tyrannos.' About A.D. 25.
‘‘Theon to his esteemed Tyrannos, many greetings. Herakleides, the bearer of this letter, is my brother. I therefore entreat you with all my power to treat him as your protégé. I have also written to your brother Hermias, asking him to communicate with you about him. You will confer upon me a very great favour if Herakleides gains your notice. Before all else you have my good wishes for un- broken health and prosperity. Good-bye.”
’
Address: ‘‘ To Tyrannos, dioiketes ”’.
ee Letter from Dionysios to his Sister Didyme.? A.D. 27.
‘‘Dionysios to his sister Didyme, many greetings, and good wishes for continued health. You have sent me no word about the clothes either by letter or by message, and they are still waiting until you send me word. Provide the bearer of this letter, Theonas, with any assistance that he wishes for. ... Take care of yourself and all your house- hold. Good-bye. The 14th year of Tiberius Caesar Augus- tus, Athyr 18.”
Address : ‘‘ Deliver from Dionysios to his sister Didyme ”’.
TV. Letter from Thaeisus to her mother Syras.* About A.D. 35.
““Thaeisus to her mother Syras. I must tell you that Seleukos came here and has fled. Don’t trouble to explain (?). Let Lucia wait until the year. Let me know
the day. Salute Ammonas my brother and... and my sister . . . and my father Theonas.”’ Ν.
Letter from Ammonios to his father Ammonios.* A.D. 54.
_“Ammonios to his father Ammonios, greeting. Kindly write me in a note the record of the sheep, how many more
1 The Oxyrhynchus Papyri, No. 292, ii., p. 292. 2 Tbid., No. 298, ii., p. 293. 3 Ibid., No. 295, ii., p. 296. 4 Toid., No. 297, ii., p. 298.
24 BIBLE STUDIES.
you have by the lambing beyond those included in the first return. . . . Good-bye. The 14th year of Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus, Epeiph 29.”
Address: “To my father Ammonios ”.
VI. Letter from Indike to Thaeisus.! Late First Century.
‘“‘Indike to Thaeisus, greeting. I sent you the bread- basket by Taurinus the camel-man; please send me an answer that you have received it. Salute my friend Theon and Nikobulos and Dioskoros and Theon and Hermokles, who have my best wishes. Longinus salutes you. Good- bye. Month Germanikos 2.”
Address: “ΤῸ Theon,? son of Nikobulos, elaiochristes at the Gymnasion”’.
VIL.
Letter of Consolation from Eirene to Taonnophris and Philon.* Second Century.
‘‘Hirene to Taonnophris and Philon, good cheer. I was as much grieved and shed as many tears over Humoiros as I shed for Didymas, and I did everything that was fitting, and so did my whole family,t Epaphrodeitos and Thermuthion and Philion and Apollonios and Plantas. But still there is nothing one can do in the face of such trouble. So I leave you to comfort yourselves. Good-bye. Athyr 1.”
Address: “ΤῸ Taonnophris and Philon”.
ΠῚ Letter from Korbolon to Herakleides.® Second Century.
‘‘Korbolon to Herakleides, greeting. I send you the key by Horion, and the piece of the lock by Onnophris, the camel-driver of Apollonios. I enclosed in the former packet a pattern of white-violet colour. I beg you to be good enough to match it, and buy me two drachmas’ weight, and send it to me at once by any messenger you can find, for
1 The Oxyrhynchus Papyri, No. 300, ii., p. 301.
? Theon is probably the husband of Thaeisus.
3 The Oxyrhynchus Papyri, No. 115, i., p. 181.
4 πάντες of ἐμοί. Grenfell and Hunt: all my friends. 5 The Oxyrhynchus Papyri, No. 113, i., p. 178 f.

216, 217] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 25
the tunic is to be woven immediately. I received everything you told me to expect by Onnophris safely. I send you by the same Onnophris six quarts of good apples. I thank all the gods to think that I came upon Plution in the Oxy- rhynchite nome. Do not think that I took no trouble about the key. The reason is that the smith is a long way irom us. [I wonder that you did not see your way to let me have what I asked you to send by Korbolon, especially when I wanted it for a festival. I beg you to buy mea silver seal, and to send it me with all speed. Take care that Onnophris buys me what Hirene’s mother told him. I told him that Syntrophos said that nothing more should be given to Amarantos on my account. Let me know what you have given him that I may settle accounts with him. Otherwise 1 and my son will come for this purpose. [On the verso] I had the large cheeses from Korbolon. I did not, however, want large ones, but small. Let me know of anything that you want, and [ will gladly do it. Farewell. Payni 1st. (P.S.) Send me an obol’s worth of cake for my nephew.” Address: “Τὸ Herakleides, son of Ammonios.”’
10. But we must not think that the heritage of true letters which we have received from the past 15 wholly com- prised in the Papyrus letters which have been thus finely preserved as autographs. In books and booklets which have been transmitted to us as consisting of ἐπιστολαί, and in others as well, there is contained a goodly number of true letters, for the preservation of which we are indebted to the circumstance that some one, at some time subsequent to their being written, treated them as literature. Just as at some future time posterity will be grateful to our learned men of to-day for their having published the Papyrus letters, 1.6., treated them as literature, so we ourselves have every cause for gratitude to those individuals, for the most part unknown, who long ago committed the indiscretion of making books out of letters. The great men whose letters, fortunately for us, were overtaken by this tate, were not on that account epistolographers; they were letter-writers— like the strange saints of the Serapeum and the obscure men and women of the Fayyim. No doubt, by reason of their letters having been preserved as literature, they have

20 BIBLE STUDIES. (217, 218
often been considered as epistolographers, and the misunder- standing may have been abetted by the vulgar notion that those celebrated men had the consciousness of their cele- brity even when they laughed and yawned, and that they could not speak or write a single word without imagining that amazed mankind was standing by to hear andread. We have not as yet, in every case, identified those whom we have to thank for real letters. But it will be sufficient for our purpose if we restrict ourselves to a few likely instances.
The letters of Aristotle (+ 322 B.c.) were published at a very early period: their publication gave the lie, in a very effective manner, to a fictitious collection which came out shortly after his death.' These letters were “true letters, occasioned by the requirements of private correspondence, not products of art, 1.6., treatises in the form of letters ’’.? This collection is usually considered to be the first instance of private letters being subsequently published.* It is there-
fore necessary to mention them here, though, indeed, it is.
uncertain whether anything really authentic has been pre- served among the fragments which have come down to us;#
by far the greater number of these were certainly products.
of the fictitious literary composition of the Alexandrian period.’—The case stands more favourably with regard to the nine letters transmitted to us under the name of Isocrates (+ 338 B.c.).6 The most recent editor’ of them comes to the following conclusions. The first letter, to Dionysios, is authentic. The two letters of introduction, Nos. 7 and 8, to Timotheos of Heracleia and the inhabitants of Mitylene respectively, bear the same mark of authenticity: ‘‘so much
1Von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Antigonos von Karystos, p. 151.
2 Stahr, Aristotelia, i., p. 195.
* Von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Antigonos von Karystos, p. 151; Suse- mihl, ii., 580.
4 Hercher, pp. 172-174. > Susemihl, ii., 580 f.
5 Hercher, pp. 319-336.
7 Von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Aristoteles und Athen, ii., pp. 391-399. It is unfortunate that some of the most recent critics of Paul’s Letters had
not those few pages before them. They might then have seen, perhaps,
both what a letter is, and what method is.
———————————————— lr
—_ a απ σου δ
218, 219] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. OH |
detail, which, wherever we can test it, we recognise to be historically accurate, and which, to a much greater extent, we are not at all in a position to judge, is not found in forgeries, unless they are meant to serve other than their ostensible purposes. There can be no talk of that in the case before us. In these letters some forms of expression occur more than once (7, 11 = 8, 10), but there is nothing extraordinary in that. If Isocrates wrote these we must credit him with having issued many such compositions.’’? These genuine letters of Isocrates are of interest also in regard to their form, as they show “ that Isocrates applied his rhetorical style also to his letters. . . . Considered from the point of view of style, they are not letters at all.”* The author considers this fact to be very instructive in regard to method ; it confirms the thesis expressed above, viz., that in answering the question as to what constitutes a true letter, it is never the form which is decisive, but ultimately only the intention of the writer; there ought not to be, but as a matter of fact there are, letters which read like pamphlets ; there are epistles, again, which chatter so insinuatingly that we forget that their daintiness is nothing but a suspicious mask. Nor need one doubt, again, the genuineness of the second letter—to King Philip: ‘‘its contents are most un- doubtedly personal”.* Letter 5, to Alexander, is likewise genuine, “‘ truly a fine piece of Isocratic finesse: it 15 genuine —just because it is more profound than it seems, and because it covertly refers to circumstances notoriously true”’.* The evidence for and against the genuineness of letter 6 is evenly balanced.’ On the other hand, letters 3, 4 and 9 are not genuine ; are partly, in fact, forgeries with a purpose.® This general result of the criticism is likewise of great value in regard to method: we must abandon the mechanical idea of a collection of letters, which would lead us to inquire as to the genuineness of the collection as a whole, instead of inquiring as to the genuineness of its component parts. Un- discerning tradition may quite well have joined together one
ΡΟ BSI tie een ayer OE 5975 ἌΡ BEN), B15 898. 6 Pp. 393-397.

28 BIBLE STUDIES. [219, 220
or two unauthentic letters with a dozen of genuine ones; and, again, a whole book of forged ‘letters ’’ may be, so to speak, the chaff in which good grains of wheat may hide themselves from the eyes of the servants: when the son of the house comes to the threshing-floor, he will discover them, for he cannot suffer that anything be lost.—The letters of the much-misunderstood Hpicwrus ( 270 B.c.) were collected with great care by the Epicureans, and joined together with those of his most distinguished pupils, Metrodorus, Polyznus, and Hermarchus, with additions from among the letters which these had received from other friends,'! and have in part come down to us. The author cannot refrain from giving here? the fragment of a letter of the philosopher to his child (made known to us by the rolls of Herculaneum), not, indeed, as being a monument of his philosophy, but be- cause it 1s part of a letter which is as simple and affectionate, as much a true letter, as that of Luther to his little son Hans :—
... [ἀ]φείγμεθα εἰς Adurraxov ὑγιαίνοντες ἐγὼ καὶ [{υθο- κλῆς Kali” ἘρμἼ]αρχος καὶ Κἰτή]σιππος, καὶ ἐκεῖ κατειλήφαμεν ὑγ[ι]αίνοντας Θεμίσταν καὶ τοὺς λοιποὺς [φί]λο[υ]ς. εὖ δὲ movelt|s καὶ σὺ ed ὑ]γιαίνεις καὶ ἡ μ[άμμη [σ]ου καὶ πάπᾳ καὶ Μάτρα[ν]. πάντα πε[ί]θη[ε, ὥσπΊερ καὶ ἔϊμ]προσθεν. εὖ yap ἴσθι, ἡ αἰτία, ὅτι καὶ ἐγὼ καὶ ο[(] λοιποὶ πάντες σε μέγα φιλοῦμεν, ὅτι τούτοις πείθη πάντα... ..
Again in Latin literature we find a considerable num- ber of real letters. ‘‘ Letters, official? as well as private, make their appearance in the lterature* of Rome at an early period, both by themselves and in historical works,°
1 Susemihl, i., p. 96 f.; H. Usener, Hpicurea, Leipzig, 1887, p. liv. ff.
ἦ From Usener’s edition, p. 154.
* Of course, official letters, too, are primarily “ true letters,” not litera- ture, even when they are addressed to a number of persons.—(This note and the two following do not belong to the quotation from Teuffel-Schwabe.)
* Hence in themselves they are manifestly not literature.
° The insertion of letters in historical works was a very common literary custom among the Greeks and Romans. It is to be classed along with the insertion of public papers and longer or shorter speeches in a historical report. If it holds good that such speeches are, speaking generally, to be regarded as

990, 291] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 29
and, soon thereafter, those of distinguished men in collec- tions.”! We may refer to a single example—certainly a very instructive one. Of Cicero (+ 43 B.C.) we possess four collec- tions of letters; in all 864, if we include the 90 addressed to him. The earliest belongs to the year 68, the latest is of the date 28th July, 48.2. ‘‘ Their contents are both per- sonal and political, and they form an inexhaustible source for a knowledge of the period,* though partly, indeed, of such a kind that the publication of them was not to Cicero’s advantage. For the correspondence of such a man as Cicero, who was accustomed to think so quickly and feel so strongly, to whom it was a necessity that he should express his thoughts and feelings as they came, either in words or in letters to some confidential friend lke Atticus, often affords a too searching, frequently even an illusory,* glance into his inmost soul. Hence the accusers of Cicero gathered the greatest part of their material from these letters.” ° The letters show a noteworthy variation of language: “in the letters to Atti- cus or other well known friends Cicero abandons restraint, while those to less intimate persons show marks of care and elaboration”’.6 The history of the gathering together of Cicero’s letters is of great importance for a right understand-
the compositions of the historian, yet, in regard to letters and public papers, the hypothesis of their authenticity should not be always summarily rejected. In regard to this question, important as it also is for the criticism of the biblical writings, see especially H. Schnorr von Carolsfeld, Uber die Reden und Briefe bei Sallust, Leipzig, 1888, p. 1 ff., and the literature given in Schiirer, i., p. 66, note 14 [Eng. Trans. I., I., p. 90]; also Teuffel-Schwabe, i., p. 84, pos. 3, and Westermann, i. (1851), p. 4.
LW. 5. Teuffel’s Geschichte der rimischen Literatur, revised by L. Schwabe ’®, i., Leipzig, 1890, p. 83.
2 Teuffel-Schwabe, i., p. 356 ff.
This point is also a very valuable one for the critic of the biblical “letters” in the matter of method. For an estimation of the historical im- portance of Cicero’s letters, the author refers, further, to J. Bernays, Edward Gibbon’s Geschichtswerk in the Gesammelte Abhh. von J. B., edited by Η. Usener, ii., Berlin, 1885, p. 243, and E. Ruete, Die Correspondenz Ciceros nm den Jahren 44 und 43, Marburg, 1883, p. 1.
4 The present writer would question this.
ὅ Teuffel-Schwabe, i., Ὁ. 356 f. CTOs 1-, Poo te

90 BIBLE STUDIES. [221, 222
ing of similar literary transactions. “Cicero did not himself collect the letters he had written, still less publish them, but even during his lifetime his intimate friends were already harbouring such intentions.”! ‘‘ After Cicero’s death the collecting and publishing of his letters was zealously pro- moted ; in the first place, undoubtedly, by Tiro, who, while Cicero was still living, had resolved to collect his letters.” ? Cornelius Nepos, according to a note in that part of his biography of Atticus which was written before 34 B.c., had, even by that date, a knowledge, from private sources, of the letters to Atticus ;? ‘‘ they were not as yet published, indeed, as he expressly says, but, it would appear, already collected with a view to publication. The first known mention of a letter from Cicero’s correspondence being published is found at the earliest’? in Seneca The following details of the work of collection may be taken as established. Atticus negotiated the issue of the letters addressed to him, while the others appear to have been published gradually by Tiro ; both editors suppressed their own letters to Cicero. Turo arranged the letters according to the individuals who had received them, and published the special correspondence of each in one or more volumes, according to the material he had. Such special materials, again, as did not suffice for a complete volume, as also isolated letters, were bound up in miscellanea (embracing letters to two or more individuals), while previously published collections were supplemented in later issues by letters which had only been written subse- quently, or subsequently rendered accessible. The majority of these letters of Cicero are “ truly confidential outpourings of the feelings of the moment,” ° particularly those addressed to Atticus—“ confidential letters, in which the writer ex-
1 Teuffel-Schwabe, i., p. 357, quotes in connection with this Cic. ad Attic., 16, 55 (44 B.c.) mearum epistularum nulla est συναγωγή, sed habet Tro imstar LXX, et quidem sunt a te quaedam sumendae ; eas ego oportet perspiciam, corrigam ; tum demque edentur,—and to Tiro, Ham., 16, 171 (46 B.c.) tuas quo- que epistulas vis referri im volwmina.
2 Teuffel-Schwabe, i., p. 357. 3 Thid.
4 [bid., p. 358. δ Ibid., p. 83.

222, 223) LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 91
presses himself without a particle of constraint, and which often contain allusions intelligible to the receiver alone. In some parts they read like soliloquies.”’1 The authenticity of the letters to Brutus, for instance, has been disputed by many, but these assailants ‘‘ have been worsted on all points, and the authenticity is now more certain than ever. The objections that have been urged against this collection, and those, in particular, which relate to the contradictions be- tween Cicero’s confidential judgments upon individuals and those he made publicly or in utterances of other times, are of but little weight.” ?
11. The fact that we know of a relatively large number of literary letters, 16., epistles, of ancient times, and that, further, we possess many such, is a simple consequence of their being literary productions. Literature is designed not merely for the public of the time being; it is also for the future. It has not been ascertained with certainty which was the first instance of the literary letter in Greek litera- ture. Susemihl*’ is inclined to think that the epidictic triflings of Lysias (+ 379 B.c.) occupy this position—that is, if they be authentic—but he certainly considers it possible that they originated in the later Attic period. Aristotle em- ployed the ‘‘imaginary letter ”’ (fictiver Brief) for his Protrep- tikos.* We have ‘‘ didactic epistles’ of Hpicwrus, as also of Dionysius of Halicarnassus, and we may add to these such writings of Plutarch as De Conjugalibus Praeceptis, De Tran- quillitate Animi, De Animae Procreatione °—literary productions to which one may well apply the words of an ancient expert in such things,® ov μὰ τὴν ἀλήθειαν ἐπιστολαὶ λέγοιντο ἄν, ἀλλὰ συγγράμματα τὸ χαίρειν ἔχοντα προσγεγραμμένον, and εἰ γάρ τις ἐν ἐπιστολῇ σοφίσματα γράφει καὶ φυσιολογίας,
1 Teuffel-Schwabe, i., p. 362.
2 Ibid., p. 364. This is another point highly important in regard to method,—for the criticism of the Pauline Letters in particular.
5 ii., p. 600.
* Von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Aristoteles und Athen, ii., p. 393.
ἢ Westermann, i. (1851), p. 13. See Susemihl, ii., p. 601, for many other examples in Greek literature.
ὁ Demetr. de elocwt., 228 (Hercher, p. 13), and 231 (ELS p. 14):

32 BIBLE STUDIES. [223, 224
γράφει μέν, οὐ μὴν ἐπιστολὴν γράφει. Among the Romans, M. Porcius Cato (+ 149 B.c.) should probably be named as one of the first writers of epistles ;? the best known, doubtless, are Seneca and Pliny. L. Annaeus Seneca*® (+ 65 A.D.) began about the year 57—at a time when Paul was writing his ‘“‘oreat ᾿᾿ letters—to write the Hpistulae Morales to his friend Lucilius, intending from the first that they should be pub- lished ; most probably the first three books were issued by himself. Then in the time of Trajan, C. Plinius Caecilius Secundus * (+ ca. 113 A.D.) wrote and published nine books of ‘‘letters’’; the issue of the collection was already com- plete by the time Pliny went to Bithynia. Then came his correspondence with Trajan, belonging chiefly to the period of his governorship in Bithynia (ca. September 111 to January 113). The letters of Pliny were likewise intended from the
first for publication, ‘“‘and hence are far from giving the
same impression of freshness and directness as those of Cicero” ;° ‘with studied variety they enlarge upon a multi- tude of topics, but are mainly designed to exhibit their author in the most favourable light” ;° “they exhibit him as an affectionate husband, a faithful friend, a generous slaveholder, a noble-minded citizen, a liberal promoter of all good causes, an honoured orator and author’’;’ “ΟΠ the other hand, the correspondence with Trajan incidentally raises a sharp contrast between the patience and quiet prudence of the emperor and the struggling perplexity and self-importance of his vicegerent’’. ‘ All possible care has likewise been bestowed upon the form of these letters.” ὃ
There are several other facts illustrative of the extremely
ΤᾺ saying of the Rhetor Aristides (2nd cent. B.c.) shows how well an ancient epistolographer was able to estimate the literary character of his compositions. In his works we find an ἐπὶ ᾿Αλεξάνδρῳ ἐπιτάφιος dedicated τῇ βουλῇ καὶ τῷ δήμῳ τῷ Κοτυαέων, of which he himself says (i., p. 148, Dindorf), ὕπερ γε καὶ ἐν ἀρχῇ Tis ἐπιστολῆς εἶπον ἢ ὅ τι βούλεσθε καλεῖν τὸ βιβλίον. Hence Westermann, iii. (1852), p. 4, applies to this and to another “ letter” of Aristides the name declamationes epistolarum sub specie latentes.
? Teuffel-Schwabe, i., pp. 84, 197 f. 3 Totd., ii., p. 700. 4 Ibid., ii., pp. 849, 851 ff. 5 Tbid,,.i1., p. 852. 6 Thid., ii., p. 849. 7 To1d., 11., p. 8o2:
5 Thid. 9 Thid.

| | | ; ) ;
294, 995] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 99
wide dissemination of the practice of epistle-writing among the Greeks and Romans. The epistle, having once gained a position as a literary eidos, became differentiated into a whole series of almost independent forms of composition. We should, in the first place, recall the poetical epistle’ (especially of Lucilius, Horace, Ovid); but there were also juristic epistles—a literary form which probably originated in the written responsa to questions on legal subjects ; " further, there were epistule medicinales,® gastronomic “letters,” * etc. In this connection it were well to direct particular attention to the great popularity of the epistle as the special form of magical and religious literature. ‘All the Magic Papyri are of this letter-form, and in all the ceremonial -and mystic literature—to say nothing of other kinds—it was the customary form. At that time the pioneers of new religions clothed their message in this form, and even when they furnish their writings with a stereotype title of such a kind, and with particularly sacred names, it would yet be doing them an injustice simply to call them forgers.”’ °
12. A very brief reference to the pseudonymous epis- tolography of antiquity is all that is required here. It will be sufficient for us to realise the great vogue it enjoyed, after the Alexandrian period, among the Greeks and subsequently among the Romans. It is decidedly one of the most char- acteristic features of post-classical literature. We already find a number of the last-mentioned epistles bearing the names of pretended authors; it is, indeed, difficult to draw a line between the “genuine” and the fictitious epistles when the two are set in contrast to letters really such.° As may be easily understood, pseudonymous epistolography specially affected the celebrated names of the past, and not least the names of those great men the real letters of whom were extant in collections. The literary practice of using
1 Teuffel-Schwabe, i., p. 39 f. 2Tbid., 1.. ps 84:
3 Tbid:, 1., p- 85. 4 Susemihl, ii., p. 601.
ῬΑ, Dieterich, Abraxas, p. 161 f. Particular references will be found there and specially in Fleck. Jhb. Suppl. xvi. (1888), p. 757.
δ Cf. pp. 15 and 20 above. 3

94 BIBLE STUDIES. (225, 226
assumed or protective names was found highly convenient by such obscure people as felt that they must make a contribu- tion to literature of a page or two ; they did not place their own names upon their books, for they had the true enough pre- sentiment that these would be a matter of indifference to their contemporaries and to posterity, nor did they substitute for them some unknown Gaius or Timon: what they did was to write ‘“‘letters’’ of Plato or Demosthenes, of Aristotle or his royal pupil, of Cicero, Brutus or Horace. It would be superfluous in the meantime to go into particulars about any specially characteristic examples, the more so as the present position of the investigation still makes it difficult for us to assign to each its special historical place, but at all events the pseudonymous epistolography of antiquity stands out quite clearly as a distinct aggregate of literary phenomena. Suffice it only to refer further to what may be very well gleaned from a recent work,' viz., that the early imperial period was the classical age of this most unclassical manu- facturing of books.
TV,
13. The author’s purpose was to write Prolegomena to the biblical letters and epistles: it may seem now to be high time that he came to the subject. But he feels that he might now break off, and still confidently believe that he has not neglected his task. What remains to be said is really implied in the foregoing pages. It was a problem in the method of literary history which urged itself upon him; he has solved it, for himself at least, in laying bare the roots by which it adheres to the soil on which flourished aforetime the spacious garden of God—Holy Scripture.
To the investigator the Bible offers a large number of writings bearimg a name which appears to be simple, but which nevertheless conceals within itself that same problem —a name which every child seems to understand, but upon which, nevertheless, the learned man must ponder deeply
14. F. Marcks, Symbola critica ad Epistolographos Graecos, Bonn, 1883.
226, 227] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 35
if ever he will see into the heart of the things called by it. ‘Letters’?! How long did the author work with this term without having ever once reflected on what it meant; how long did it accompany him through his daily task in science without his observing the enigma that was inscribed on its work-a-day face! Others may have been more knowing: the author’s experiences were like those of a man who plants a vineyard without being able to distinguish the true vine-shoots from the suckers of the wild grape. That was, of course, a sorry plight—as bad as if one were to labour upon Attic tragedies without knowing what an Attic tragedy is. One may, indeed, write a letter without necessarily knowing what a letter is. The best letter- writers have certainly not cherished any doctrinaire opinions on the subject. The ancient Greek and Latin “guides to letter-writing’! appeared long after Cicero: neither did the Apostles, for that matter, know anything of Halieutics. But if one is to understand those literary memorials in the Bible which have come to us under the name of “letters,” and to make them intelligible to others, the first condition is, of course, that one must have an historical comprehen- sion of his purpose, must have previously divested the problematic term of its problematic character: οὐ yap ἐπειδὴ ἐπιστολὴ προσαγορεύεται ἑνικῷ ὀνόματι, ἤδη καὶ πασῶν TOV κατὰ τὸν βίον φερομένων ἐπιστολῶν εἷς τις ἐστι χαρακτὴρ καὶ μία προσηγορία, ἀλλὰ διάφοροι, καθὼς ἔφην" Τί we rightly infer, from an investigation of ancient literature, that the familiar term ‘‘ letter’ must be broken up—above all, into the two chief categories real letter and epistle, then the biblical “letters”? likewise must be investigated from this point of
1 Cf. on this Westermann, i. (1851), p. 9 f. For Greek theorists in letter-writing, see Hercher, pp. 1-16; for the Latin, the Rhetores Latini minores, em., C. Halm, fasc. ii., Leipzig, 1863, pp. 4471. and 589.
2[Pseudo-]Procl. De Forma Epistolari (Hercher, p. 6 f.). This quota- tion, it is true, refers not to the various logical divisions of the concept “letter,” but to the 41 [!] various sub-classes of true letters. The process of distinguishing these various classes ([Pseudo-]Demetr. [Hercher, p. 1 ff.] similarly enumerates 21 categories) is, in its details, sometimes very extra- ordinary.

36 BIBLE STUDIES. [228
view. Just as the language of the Bible ought to be studied in its actual historical context of contemporary language ; } just as its religious and ethical contents must be studied in their actual historical context of contemporary religion and civilisation *—so the biblical writings, too, in the literary in- vestigation of them, ought not to be placed in an isolated posi- tion. The author speaks of the biblical writings, not of the bibli- cal literature. To apply the designation literature to certain portions of the biblical writings would be an illegitimate procedure. Not all that we find printed in books at the pre- sent day was literature from the first. A comparison of the biblical writings, in their. own proper character, with the other writings of antiquity, will show us that in each case there is a sharp distinction between works which were literature from the first and writings which only acquired that character later on, or will show, at least, that we must so distinguish them from each other. This is nowhere more evident than in the case under discussion. When we make the demand that the biblical ‘letters’ are to be set in their proper relation to ancient letter-writing as a whole, we do not thereby imply that they are products of ancient epistolography, but rather that they shall be investigated simply with regard to the question, how far the categories implied in the problematic term letter are to be employed in the criticism of them. We may designate our question regarding the biblical letters and epistles as a question regarding the literary character of the writings transmitted by the Bible under the name letters,®? but the question re- garding their literary character must be so framed that the answer will affirm the preliterary character, probably of some, possibly of all.
1 Cf. p. 63 ff.
2 The author has already briefly expressed these ideas about the history of biblical religion in the essay Zur Methode der Biblischen Theologie des Neuen Testamentes, Zeitschrift fiir Theologie und Kirche, iii. (1898), pp. 126-139.
3H, P. Gould, in an article entitled “The Literary Character of St. Paul’s Letters” in The Old and New Testament Student, vol. xi. (1890), pp. 71 ff. and 134 ff., seems to apply the same question to some at least of the biblical “letters,” but in reality his essay has an altogether different purpose.


299] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 37
The latter has been maintained by Ε΄. Overbeck,!—at least in regard to the “letters” in the New Testament. He thinks that the Apostolic letters belong to a class of writings which we ought not to place in the province of literature at all:? the writer of a letter has, as such, no concern with literature whatever,—‘‘ because for every product of ltera- ture it is essential that its contents have an appropriate literary form’’.® The written words of a letter are nothing but the wholly inartificial and incidental substitute for spoken words. As the letter has a quite distinct and transitory motive, so has it also a quite distinct and re- stricted public—not necessarily merely one individual, but sometimes, according to circumstances, a smaller or larger company of persons: in any case, a circle of readers which can be readily brought before the writer’s mind and dis- tinctly located in the field of inward vision. A work of hterature, on the other hand, has the widest possible pub- licaity in view: the literary man’s public is, so to speak, an imaginary one, which it 1s the part of the literary work to find.* Though Overbeck thus indicates with proper precision the fundamenta! difference between the letter and literature,
1 Uber die Anfdnge der patristischen Litteratur in the Historische Zeit- schiift, 48, Neue Folge 12 (1882), p. 429 ff. The present writer cannot but emphasise how much profitable stimulation in regard to method he has received from this essay, even though he differs from the essayist on im- portant points.
2P. 429, and foot of p. 428.
* P. 429. Overbeck would seem sometimes not to be quite clear with regard to the term form, which he frequently uses. The author understands the word in the above quotation in the same way as in the fundamental pro- position on Ὁ. 423: “Τὴ the forms of literature is found its history’. Here form can be understood only as Hidos. The forms of literature are, e.g., Epos, Tragedy, History, etc. Overbeck, in his contention that the form is essential for the contents of a literary work, is undoubtedly correct, if he is referring to the good old εἴδη of literature. No one, for example, will expect a comedy to incite φόβος καὶ ἔλεος. But the contention is not correct when it refers to such a subordinate literary Hidos as the epistle. The epistle may treat of all possible subjects—and some others as well. And therefore when all is said, it is literature, a literary form—even when only a bad form (Uniform).
+P. 429.
a a




ee

98 BIBLE STUDIES. [229, 230
yet he has overlooked the necessary task of investigating whether the Apostolic letters—either as a whole or in part —may not be epistles, and this oversight on his part is the more extraordinary, since he quite clearly recognises the dis- tinction between the letter and the epistle. He speaks, at least, of ‘artificial letters,’ and contrasts them with “true letters’”’;! in point of fact, he has the right feeling,’ that there are some of the New Testament letters, the form of which is quite obviously not that of a letter at all, viz., the so-called Catholic Epistles: in some of these the form of address, being so indefinite and general, does not correspond to what we expect in a letter, and, in fact, constitutes a hitherto unsolved problem. Hence he is inclined to class them along with those New Testament writings ‘‘ which, in their own proper and original form, certainly belong to literature,’ but which, in consideration of the paucity of their different forms, must not be thought of as qualifying the New Testament to be ranked historically as the be- ginning of that literature’. Easy as it would have been to characterise the “ letters,’ thus so aptly described, as epistles, Overbeck has yet refrained from doing this, and though he seems, at least, to have characterised them as literature, yet he pointedly disputes* the contention that Christian literature begins with ‘“‘the New Testament, ’— that is, in possible case, with these letters,—and he ex- pressly says that the ‘artificial letter’? remains wholly outside of the sphere of this discussion.®
14. The present writer would assert, as against this, that ‘‘in the New Testament,” and not only there, but also in the literature of the Jews as well as of the Christians of post-New-Testament times, the transmitted “letters ’ permit of quite as marked a division into real letters and epistles, as is the case in ancient literature generally.
14. Most investigators of the New Testament letters seem to overlook the fact that this same profound difference
'P. 429 at the top. cher, 451. * Overbeck here means the Gospels, Acts of the Apostles and Revelation. 2. 426 Τῆς > P, 429.
i ee ee ee eee
231] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 39
3
already manifests itself clearly in the “letters” found among the writings of pre-Christian Judaism. Looking at the writings of early Christianity from the standpoint of literary history, we perceive that Jewish literature * was precisely the literary sphere from which the first Christians could most readily borrow and adopt something in the way of forms, εἴδη, of composition.? If, therefore, the existence of the εἶδος of the epistle can be demonstrated in this possibly archetypal sphere, our inquiry regarding the early Christian ‘letters’? manifestly gains a more definite justification. Should the doubt be raised as to whether it is conceivable that a line of demarcation, quite unmistakably present in “profane” literature, should have also touched the outlying province of the New Testament, that doubt will be stilled when it is shown that this line had actually long intersected the sphere of Jewish literature, which may have been the model for the writers of the New Testament. Between the ancient epistles and what are (possibly) the epistles of early Christianity, there subsists a literary, a morphological connec- tion; if it be thought necessary to establish a transition-link, this may quite well be found in the Jewish epistles. The way by which the epistle entered the sphere of Jewish author- ship is manifest: Alexandria, the classical soil of the epistle and the pseudo-epistle, exercised its Hellenising influence
1Not solely, of course, those writings which we now recognise as canonical.
2 The influence of a Jewish literary form can be clearly seen at its best in the Apocalypse of John. But also the Acts of the Apostles (which, along with the Gospels, the present writer would, contra Overbeck, characterise as belonging already to Christian literature) has its historical prototype, in the matter of form, in the Hellenistic writing of annals designed for the edifi- cation of the people. What in the Acts of the Apostles recalls the literary method of ‘“ profane” historical literature (e.g., insertion of speeches, letters, and official papers), need not be accounted for by a competent knowledge of classical authors on the part of the writer of it; it may quite well be ex- plained by the influence of its Jewish prototypes. When the Christians began to make literature, they adopted their literary forms, even those which have the appearance of being Greco-Roman, from Greek Judaism, with the single exception of the Hvangeliwn—a literary form which originated within Christianity itself.
40 BIBLE STUDIES. [232
upon Judaism in this matter as in others. We know not who the first Jewish epistolographer may have been, but it is, at least, highly probable that he was an Alexandrian. The taking over of the epistolary form was facilitated for him by the circumstance that already in the ancient and revered writings of his nation there was frequent mention of ‘letters,’ and that, as a matter of fact, he found a number of “letters”? actually given verbatim in the sacred text. Any one who read the Book of the Prophet Jeremiah with the eyes of an Alexandrian Hellenist, found, in chap. 29 (the prophet’s message to the captives in Babylon),' something which to his morbid literary taste seemed like an epistle. As a matter of fact, this message is a real letter, perhaps indeed the only genuine one we have from Old Testament times; a real letter, which only became literature by its subsequent admission into the book of the Prophet. As it now stands in the book, it is to be put in exactly the same class as all other real letters which were subsequently published. In its origin, in its purpose, Jer. 29, being a real letter, is non-literary, and hence, of course, we must not ask after a literary prototype for it. The wish to discover the first Israelitic or first Christian letter-writer would be as foolish as the inquiry regarding the beginnings of Jewish and, later, of Christian, epistolography 15 profitable and necessary ; besides, the doctrinaire inquirer would be cruelly undeceived when the sublime simplicity of the historical reality smiled at him from the rediscovered first Christian letter—its pages perhaps infinitely paltry in their contents: some forgotten cloak may have been the occasion of it— who will say? Jer. 29 is not, of course, a letter such as anybody might dash off in an idle moment; nay, lightnings quiver between the lines, Jahweh speaks in wrath or in blessing,—still, although a Jeremiah wrote it, although it be a documentary fragment of the history of the people and the religion of Israel, it is still a letter, neither less nor more. The antithesis of it in that respect is not wanting. There
‘Tt is, of course, possible, in these merely general observations, to avoid touching on the question of the integrity of this message.

" “ΒΡ 2 δ᾽ να Ὁ ΦΡ ΕΝ
233] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 41
has been transmitted to us, among the Old Testament Apocryphal writings, a little book bearing the name ἐπιστολὴ “Ἱερεμίου. If Jer. 29 is a letter of the prophet Jeremiah, this is an Epistle of ““ Jeremiah”. Than the latter, we could know no more instructive instance for the elucidation of the distinction between letter and epistle, or for the proper appreciation of the idea of pseudonymity in ancient litera- ture. The Greek epistolography of the Alexandrian period constituted the general literary impulse of the writer of the Epistle of ‘‘ Jeremiah,’ while the actual existence of a real letter of Jeremiah constituted the particular impulse. He wrote an epistle,—as did the other great men of the day: he wrote an epistle of ‘‘ Jeremiah,’ just as the others may have fabricated, say, epistles of ‘‘ Plato”. We can distinctly see, in yet another passage, how the motive to epistolography could be found in the then extant sacred writings of Judaism. The canonical Book of Esther speaks, in two places, of royal letters, without giving their contents: a sufficient reason for the Greek ‘reviser to sit down and manufacture them, just as the two prayers, only mentioned in the original, are given by him in full!!
Having once gained a footing, epistolography must have become very popular in Greek Judaism; we have still a whole series of Graco-Jewish ‘letters,’ which are un- questionably epistles. The author is not now thinking of the multitude of letters, ascribed to historical personages, which are inserted in historical works’; in so far as these are unauthentic, they are undoubtedly of an epistolary
1The following is also instructive: It is reported at the end of the Greek Book of Esther that the “ Priest and Levite’’ Dositheus and his son Ptolemaeus, had ‘‘ brought hither” (i.e., to Egypt) the ἐπιστολὴ τῶν Φρουραί (concerning the Feast of Purim) from Esther and Mordecai (LXX Esther “9% cf. 30), which was translated (into Greek) by Lysimachus, the son of Ptolemaeus in Jerusalem. It would thus seem that a Greek letter concern- ing Purim, written by Esther and Mordecai, was known in Alexandria. It
is not improbable that the alleged bearers of the ‘letter’ were really the authors of it.
2 The Books of Maccabees, Epistle of Aristeas, specially also Eupolemos (cf. thereon J. Freudenthal, Hellenistische Studien, part i. and ii., Breslau, 1875, p. 106 ff.), Josephus.
42 BIBLE STUDIES. [284
character, but they belong less to the investigation of epistolography than to the development of historical style. We should rather call to mind books and booklets like the Epistle of Aristeas, the two! epistles at the beginning of the Ind Book of Maccabees, the Epistle of ““ Baruch”’ to the nine and a half tribes in captivity, attached to the Apocalypse of Baruch,? perhaps the twenty-eighth ‘‘ Letter of Diogenes,’ * and certain portions of the collection of “‘ letters’ which bears the name of Heraclitus.*
15. Coming, then, to the early Christian “letters ” with our question, letter or epistle ? it will be our first task to de- termine the character of the “letters” transmitted to us. under the name of Paul. Was Paul a letter-writer or an epistolographer ? The question isa sufficiently pressing one, in view of the exceedingly great popularity of epistolography in the Apostle’s time. Nor can we forthwith answer it, even leaving the Pastoral epistles out of consideration, and attending in the first place only to those whose genuineness is more or less established. The difficulty is seen in its most pronounced form when we compare the letter to Philemon with that to the Romans; here we seem to have two such heterogeneous compositions that it would appear questionable whether we should persist in asking the above disjunctive question. May not Paul have written both letters and epistles? It would certainly be preposterous to assume, a priori, that the “letters”? of Paul must be either all letters or all epistles. The inquiry must rather be directed upon each particular ‘“letter’—a task the ful- filment of which lies outside the scope of the present
1C. Bruston (Trois lettres des Juifs de Palestine, ZAW. x. [1890], pp. 110-117) has recently tried to show that 2 Macc. 11-218 contains not two but. three letters (127% 1 7-102, 1 10 δ: 18),
2 Unless this be of Christian times, as appears probable to the present writer. In any case it is an instructive analogy for the literary criticism of the Epistle of James and the First Epistle of Peter.
9 Cf. J. Bernays, Lucian und die Kyniker, Berlin, 1879, p. 96 ff.
4J. Bernays, Die heraklitischen Briefe, Berlin, 1869, particularly p. 61 ff.
EEE
—_—_ 2 .... oo
235] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 43
methodological essay.! But, as it is, the author may here at least indicate his opinion.
It appears to him quite certain that the authentic writings of the Apostle are true letters, and that to think of them as epistles? is to take away what is best in them. They were, of course, collected, and treated as literature—in
1 At some future time the author may perhaps pursue the subject further. He hopes then to treat also of so-called formal matters (form of the address, of the beginning and the end, style of letter, etc.), for which he has already gathered some materials.
? But seldom has this been more distinctly maintained than quite re- cently by A. Gercke, who designates the letters of Paul, in plain language, as ‘treatises in the form of letters” (GGA., 1894, p. 577). But this great and widely-prevalent misconception of the matter stretches back in its be- ginnings to the early years of the Christian Church. Strictly speaking, it began with the first movements towards the canonisation of the letters. Canonisation was possible only when the non-literary (and altogether un- canonical) character of the messages had been forgotten; when Paul, from being an Apostle, had become a literary power and an authority of the past. Those by whom the letters were treated as elements of the developing New Testament considered the Apostle to be an epistolographer. Further, the pseudo-Pauline ‘ letters,” including the correspondence between Paul and Seneca, are evidences of the fact that the writers of them no longer under- stood the true nature of the genuine letters; the bringing together of the Apostle and the epistolographer Seneca is in itself a particularly significant fact. We may also mention here the connecting—whether genuine or not— of Paul with the Attic orators (in the Rhetorician Longinus: cf. J. L. Hug, Hinlertung wm die Schriften des Neuen Testaments, ii.°, Stuttgart and Tiibingen, 1826, p. 334 ff.; Heinrici, Das zweite Sendschreiben des Ap. P. an die Korinthier, p. 578). The same position is held very decidedly by A. Scultetus (+1624), according to whom the Apostle imitates the ‘letters’ of Heraclitus (cf. Bernays, Die heraklitischen Briefe, p. 151). How well the misunderstanding still flourishes, how tightly it shackles both the criticism of the Letters and the representation of Paulinism, the author will not further discuss at present; he would refer to his conclusions regarding method at the end of this essay. In his opinion, one of the most pertinent things that have been of late written on the true character of Paul’s letters is § 70 of Reuss’s Introduction (Die Geschichte der heiligen Schrr. N.T. p. 70). Mention may also be made—-reference to living writers being omitted —of A. Ritschl’s Die christl. Lehre von der Rechtfertiqung und Versihnung, 11.", p- 22. Supporters of the correct view were, of course, not wanting even in earlier times. Compare the anonymous opinion in the Codex Barberinus, 111., 36 (saec. xi.): ἐπιστολαὶ Παύλου καλοῦνται, ἐπειδὴ ταύτας 6 Παῦλος ἰδίᾳ ἐπι- στέλλει καὶ BV αὐτῶν ods μὲν ἤδη ἑώρακε καὶ ἐδίδαξεν ὑπομιμνήσκει καὶ ἐπιδιορθοῦται, ovs δὲ μὴ ἑώρακε σπουδάζει κατηχεῖν καὶ διδάσκειν, in HK. Klostermann’s Analecta zur Septuaginta, Hexapla und Patristik, Leipzig, 1895, p. 95.
44 BIBLE STUDIES. [236, 237
point of fact, as literature in the highest sense, as canonical —at an early period. But that was nothing more than an after-experience of the letters, for which there were many precedents in the literary development sketched above. But this after-experience cannot change their original char- acter, and our first task must be to ascertain what this character actually is. Paul had no thought of adding a few fresh compositions to the already extant Jewish epistles, still less of enriching the sacred literature of his nation; no, every time he wrote, he had some perfectly definite impulse in the diversified experiences of the young Christian churches. He had no presentiment of the place his words would occupy in universal history; not so much as that they would still be in existence in the next generation, far less that one day the people would look upon them as Holy Scripture. We now know them as coming down from the centuries with the literary patina and the nimbus of canoni- city upon them; should we desire to attain ἃ historical estimate of their proper character, we must disregard both. Just as we should not allow the dogmatic idea of the mass to influence our historical consideration of the last Supper of Jesus with His disciples, nor the liturgical notions of a prayerbook-commission to influence our historical considera- tion of the Lord’s Prayer, so little dare we approach the letters of Paul with ideas about literature and notions about the canon. Paul had better work to do than the writing of books, and he did not flatter himself that he could write Scripture; he wrote letters, real letters, as did Aristotle and Cicero, as did the men and women of the Fayyim. They differ from the messages of the homely Papyrus leaves from Egypt not as letters, but only as the letters of Paul. No one will hesitate to grant that the Letter to Philemon has the character of a letter. It must be toa large extent a mere doctrinaire want of taste that could make any one describe this gem, the preservation of which we owe to some fortunate accident, as an essay, say, “on the attitude of Christianity to slavery”. It is rather a letter, full of a charming, unconscious naiveté, full of kindly

ee δ πων εν υνδιονδι των

237, 238] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 45
human nature. It is thus that Epicurus writes to his child, and Moltke to his wife: no doubt Paul talks of other matters than they do—no one letter, deserving the name, has ever looked like another—but the Apostle does exactly what is done by the Greek philosopher and the German officer.
It is also quite clear that the note of introduction contained in Rom. 16 is of the nature of a true letter. No one, it is to be hoped, will make the objection that it is directed to a number of persons—most likely the Church at Ephesus; the author thinks that he has made it probable that the number of receivers is of no account in the determination of the nature of a letter! But the Letter to the Philippians is also as real a letter as any that was ever written. Here a quite definite situation of affairs forced the Apostle to take up his pen, and the letter reflects a quite definite frame of mind, or, at least, enables us to imagine it. The danger of introducing into our investigation considerations which, so far as concerns method,’ are irrelevant, is, of course, greater in this case. Some reader will again be found to contend that, in con- trast to the private letter to Philemon, we have here a congregational letter: some one, again, who is convinced of the valuelessness of this distinction, will bring forward the peculiarity of the contents: the letter is of a ‘‘ doctrinal ”’ character, and should thus be designated a doctrinal letter, This peculiarity must not be denied—though, indeed, the author has misgivings about applying the term doctrine to the Apostle’s messages; the ‘doctrinal’’ sections of the letters impress him more as being of the nature of con- fessions and attestations. But what is added towards the answering of our question letter or epistle ? by the expression
1 Cf. pp. 4 and 18 f.
*The relative lengthiness of the letter must also be deemed an irrelevant consideration—one not likely, as the author thinks, to be ad- vanced. The difference between a letter and an epistle cannot be decided by the tape-line. Most letters are shorter than the Letter to the Philip- pians, shorter still than the ‘‘great’’ Pauline letters. But there are also quite diminutive epistles: a large number of examples are to be found in the collection of Hercheyr.
46 BIBLE STUDIES. [238, 239
‘doctrinal”’ letter—however pertinent a term? If a letter is intended to instruct the receiver, or a group of receivers, does it thereby cease to be a letter? A worthy pastor, let us say, writes some stirring words to his nephew at the university, to the effect that he should not let the “faith” be shaken by professorial wisdom; and he refutes point by point the inventions of men. Perhaps, when he himself was a student, he received some such sincere letters from his father against the new orthodoxy which was then, in its turn, beginning to be taught. Do such letters forthwith become tractates simply because they are ‘doctrinal’ ?1 We must carefully guard against an amalgamation of the two categories doctrinal letter and epistle. If any one be so inclined, he may break up the letter into a multitude of subdivisions: the twenty-one or forty-one τύποι of the old theorists? may be increased to whatever extent one wishes.
1 At the present day it would be difficult enough, in many cases, to determine forthwith the character of such letters. For instance, the so- called Pastoral Letters of bishops and general superintendents might almost always be taken as epistles, not, indeed, because they are official, but because they are designed for a public larger than the address might lead one to suppose. Further, at the present day they are usually printed from the outset. An example from the Middle Ages, the “letter” of Gregory VII. to Hermann of Metz, dated the 15th March, 1081, has been investigated in regard to its literary character by ὦ. Mirbt, Die Publizistik um Zeitalter Gregors VII., Leipzig, 1894, p. 23. Cf., on p. 4 of the same work, the observations on literary publicity. The defining lines are more easily drawn in regard to antiquity. A peculiar hybrid phenomenon is found in the still extant cor- respondence of Abelard and Heloise. It is quite impossible to say exactly where the letters end and the epistles begin. Heloise writes more in the style of the letter, Abelard more in that of the epistle. There had, of course, been a time when both wrote differently: the glow of feeling which, in the nun’s letters, between biblical and classical quotations, still breaks occa- sionally into a flame of passion, gives us an idea of how Heloise may once have written, when it was impossible for her to act against his wish, and when she felt herself altogether guilty and yet totally innocent. Neither, certainly, did Abelard, before the great sorrow of his life had deprived him of both his nature and his naturalness, write in the affected style of the convert weary of life, whose words like deadly swords pierced the soul of the woman who now lived upon memories. In his later “letters” he kept, though perhaps only unconsciously, a furtive eye upon the public into whose hands they might some day fall—and then he was no longer a letter-writer at all.
2 See p. 35.

239, 240] LETTERS AND EPISTLES., 417
The author has no objection to any one similarly breaking up the Pauline letters into several subdivisions, and subsuming some of them under the species doctrinal letter; only one should not fondly imagine that by means of the doctrinal letter he has bridged over the great gulf between letter and epistle. The pre-literary character even of the doctrinal letter must be maintained.
This also holds good of the other Letters of Paul, even of the ‘great Epistles”. They, too, are partly doctrinal; they contain, in fact, theological discussions : but even in these, the Apostle had no desire to make literature. The Letter to the Galatians is not a pamphlet ‘ upon the relation of Christianity to Judaism,” but a message sent in order to bring back the foolish Galatians to their senses. The letter can only be understood in the light of its special purpose as such.’ How much more distinctly do the Letters to the Corinthians bear the stamp of the true letter! The second of them, in particular, reveals its true character in every line; in the author's opinion, it 1s the most letter-like of all the letters of Paul, though that to Philemon may appear on the surface to have a better claim to that position. The great difficulty in the understanding of it is due to the very fact that it is so truly a letter, so full of allusions and familiar references, so per- vaded with irony and with a depression which struggles against itself—matters of which only the writer and the readers of it understood the purport, but which we, for the most part, can ascertain only approximately. What is doctrinal in it is not there for its own sake, but is altogether subservient to the purpose of the letter. The nature of the letters which were brought to the Corinthians by the fellow- workers of Paul, was thoroughly well understood by the receivers themselves, else surely they would hardly have allowed one or two of them to be lost. They agreed, in fact, with Paul, in thinking that the letters had served their purpose when once they had been read. We may most deeply lament that they took no trouble to preserve the letters, but it only shows lack of judgment to reproach
1 Cf. the observations upon this letter in the Spicilegvwm below.
48 BIBLE STUDIES. | : [240, 241
them on this account. A letter is something ephemeral, and must be so by its very nature;1 it has as little desire to be immortal as a téte-a-téte has to be minuted, or an
alms to be entered in a ledger. In particular, the temper
of mind in which Paul and his Churches passed their days was not such as to awaken in them an interest for the centuries to come. The Lord was at hand; His advent was within the horizon of the times, and such an anticipa- tion has nothing in common with the enjoyment of the contemplative book-collector. The one-sided religious temper of mind has never yet had any affection for such things as. interest the learned. Modern Christians have become more prosaic. We institute collections of archives, and found libraries, and, when a prominent man dies, we begin to speculate upon the destination of his literary remains: all this needs a hope less bold and a faith less simple than belonged to the times of Paul. From the point of view
of hterature, the preservation even of two letters to the
Corinthians 1s a secondary and accidental circumstance, perhaps owing, in part, to their comparative lengthiness,. which saved them from immediate destruction.
The Letter to the Romans is also a real letter. No doubt there are sections in it which might also stand in an epistle ; the whole tone of it, generally speaking, stamps it as different from the other Pauline letters. But nevertheless it is not a book, and the favourite saying that it 1s a compendium of Paulinism, that the Apostle has, in it, laid down his Dog- matics and his Ethics, certainly manifests an extreme lack of taste. No doubt Paul wanted to give instruction, and he did it, in part, with the help of contemporary theology, but he does not think of the literary public of his time, or of Christians in general, as his readers; he appeals to a little company of men, whose very existence, one may say, was unknown to the public at large, and who occupied a special position within Christianity. It is unlikely that the Apostle
‘This explains why, of the extant “letters” of celebrated men who have written both letters and epistles, it is the latter that have, in general,
been preserved in larger numbers than the former. Compare, for instance, the extant “letters” of Origen.


241, 242] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 49
would send copies of the letter to the brethren in Ephesus, Antioch or Jerusalem; it was to Rome that he despatched it: nor did the bearer of it go to the publishers in the Imperial City, but rather to some otherwise unknown brother in the Lord—just like many another passenger by the same ship of Corinth, hastening one to that house, another to this, there to deliver a message by word of mouth, here to leave a letter or something else. The fact that the Letter to the Romans is not so enlivened by personal references as the other letters of Paul is explained by the conditions under which it was written: he was addressing a Church which he did not yet personally know. Considered in the light of this fact, the infrequence of personal references in the letter lends no support to its being taken as a literary epistle; it is but the natural result of its non-literary purpose. Moreover, Paul wrote even the ‘‘doctrinal’’ portions in his heart’s blood. The words ταλαίπωρος ἐγὼ ἄνθρωπος are no cool rhetorical expression of an objective ethical condition, but the impressive indication of a personal ethical experience : it is not theological paragraphs which Paul is writing here, but his confessions.
Certain as it seems to the author that the authentic messages of Paul are letters, he is equally sure that we have also a number of epistles from New Testament times. They belong, as such, to the beginnings of ““ Christian litera- ture”. The author considers the Letter to the Hebrews as most unmistakably of all an epistle. It professes, in chap. 13”, to be a λόγος THs παρακλήσεως, and one would have no occasion whatever to consider it anything but a literary ora- tion—hence not as an epistle? at all—if the ἐπέστειλα and
1Tt is a further proof of these “‘epistles’’ being letters that we know the bearers of some of them. The epistle as such needs no bearer, and should it name one it is only as a matter of form. It is a characteristic cir- cumstance that the writer of the epistle at the end of the Apocalypse of Baruch sends his booklet to the receivers by an eagle. Paul uses men as his messengers: he would not have entrusted a letter to eagles —they fly too high.
2Nor, strictly speaking, can we count the First Epistle of John as an epistle—on the ground, that is, that the address must have disappeared. It
50 BIBLE STUDIES. [242, 243
the greetings at the close did not permit of the supposition that it had at one time opened with something of the nature of an address as well. The address has been lost ; it might all the more easily fall out as it was only a later insertion. The address is, indeed, of decisive importance for the under- standing of a letter, but in an epistle it is an unessential element. In the letter, the address occupies, so to speak, the all-controlling middle-ground of the picture; in the epistle it is only ornamental detail. Any given λόγος can be made an epistle by any kind of an address. The Epistle to the Hebrews stands on the same literary plane as the Fourth Book of Maccabees, which describes itself as a φιλοσοφώτατος λόγος; the fact that the latter seems to avoid the appearance of being an epistle constitutes a purely external difference between them, and one which is im- material for the question regarding their literary character.— The author is chiefly concerned about the recognition of the “ Catholic”? Epistles, or, to begin with, of some of them at least, as literary epistles. With a true instinct, the ancient Church placed these Catholic Epistles as a special group over against the Pauline. It seems to the author that the idea of their catholicity, thus assumed, is to be understood from the form of address in the “ letters,” and not primarily from the special character of their contents.| They are composi-
is a brochure, the literary eidos of which cannot be determined just at once. But the special characterisation of it does not matter, if we only recognise the literary character of the booklet. That it could be placed among the “letters” (i.e., in this case, epistles) of the N.T., is partly explained by the fact that it is allied to them in character: literature associated with litera- ture. Hence the present writer cannot think that Weiss (Meyer, xiv.” [1888], Ῥ. 15) is justified in saying: “It is certainly a useless quarrel about words to refuse to call such a composition a letter in the sense of the New Testament letter-literature”. The question letter or epistle ? is in effect the necessary pre- condition for the understanding of the historical facts of the case. The “sense” of the New Testament letter-literatwre, which Weiss seems to assume as something well known, but which forms our problem, cannot really be ascertained without first putting that question.—The author does not venture here to give a decision regarding the Second and Third Epistles of John; the question “letter or epistle 2” is particularly difficult to answer in these cases.
1 This idea of a catholic writing is implied in the classification of the Aristotelian writings which is given by the philosopher David the Armenian



243, 244] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. al
tions addressed to Christians—one might perhaps say the Churech—in general. The catholicity of the address implies, of course, a catholicity in the contents. What the Church calls catholic, we require only to call epistle, and the un- solved enigma with which, according to Overbeck,’ they present us, is brought nearer to a solution. The special position of these “letters,” which is indicated by their having the attribute catholic instinctively applied to them, is due precisely to their literary character: catholic means in this connection literary. The impossibility of recognising the “‘letters’’ of Peter, James and Jude as real letters fol- lows directly from the peculiarity in the form of their address. Any one who writes to the elect who are sojowrners of the Diaspora in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia, or to the twelve tribes which are of the Diaspora, or even to them which have obtained a like precious faith with us, or to them that are called, beloved in God the Father and kept for Jesus Christ, must surely have reflected on the question as to what means he must employ in order to convey his message to those so addressed. Quite similarly does that other early Christian epistle still bear the address to the Hebrews ; quite similarly does the author of the epistle at the close of the Apocalypse of Baruch write to the nine-and-a- half tribes of the Captivity, and Pseudo-Diogenes, ep. 28," to the so-called Hellenes. The only way by which the letters could reach such ideal addresses was to have them reproduced in numbers from the first. But that means that they were literature. Had the First Epistle of Peter,® for instance, been intended as a real letter, then the writer of it, or a substitute, would have had to spend many a year of his life ere he could deliver the letter throughout the enormous circuit of the (end of the fifth cent. a.p.) in his prolegomena to the categories of Aristotle (Hd. Ch. A. Brandis, Schol. in Arist., p. 24a, Westermann, iii. [1852], p. 9). In contrast to μερικός special, καθολικός is used as meaning general; both
terms refer to the contents of the writings, not to the largeness of the public for which the author respectively designed them.
ΤΡ, 431. 2 Hercher, p. 241 fi.
3 For the investigation of the Second Epistle of Peter,see the observa- tions which follow below in the Spicilequwm.
52 BIBLE STUDIES. [245
countries mentioned. The epistle, in fact, could only reach its public as a booklet; at the present day it would not be sent as a circular letter in sealed envelope, but as printed matter by book-post. It is true, indeed, that these Catholic Epistles are Christian literature: their authors had no desire to enrich universal literature ; they wrote their books for a definite circle of people with the same views as themselves, that is, for Christians; but books they wrote. Very few books, indeed, are so arrogant as to aspire to become univer- sal literature; most address themselves to a section only of the immeasurable public—they are special literature, or party literature, or national literature. Itis quite admissible to speak of a literary public, even if the public in question be but a limited one—even if its boundaries be very sharply drawn. Hence the early Christian epistles were, in the first instance, special literature; to the public at large in the imperial period they were altogether unknown, and, doubt- less, many a Christian of the time thought of them as esoteric, and handed them on only to those who were brethren ; but, in spite of all, the epistles were designed for some kind of publicity in a hterary sense: they were destined for the brethren. The ideal indefiniteness of this destination has the result that the contents have an ecumeni- cal cast. Compare the Epistle of James, for instance, with the Letters of Paul, in regard to this point. From the latter we construct the history of the apostolic age; the former, so long as it is looked upon as a letter, 1s the enigma of the New Testament. Those to whom the “‘letter’’ was addressed have been variously imagined to be Jews, Gentile Christians, Jewish Christians, or Jewish Christians and Gentile Christians together ; the map has been scrutinised in every part without any one having yet ascertained where we are to seek—not to say find—the readers. Butif Diaspora be not a definite geographical term, no more is the Epistle of ‘“‘James”’ a letter. Its pages are inspired by no special motive ; there is nothing whatever to be read between the lines; its words are of such general interest that they might, for the most part, stand in the Book of Wisdom, or the

946] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. δϑ
Imitation of Christ. It is true, indeed, that the epistle reveals that it is of early Christian times, but nothing more. There is nothing uniquely distinctive in its motive, and hence no animating element in its contents. ‘‘ James” sketches from models, not from nature. Unfortunately there has always been occasion, among Christians, to censure contentions and sins of the tongue, greed and calumny; indignation at the unmercifulness of the rich and sympathy with the poor are common moods of the prophetic or apostolic mind ; the scenes from the synagogue and the harvest-field are familiar types —the epistle, in fact, is pervaded by the expressions and topics of the aphoristic ‘‘ wisdom” of the Old Testament and of Jesus. Even if it could be demonstrated that the writer was alluding to cases which had actually occurred, yet we cannot perceive how these cases concern him in any special way; there is no particular personal relation between him and those whom he ‘‘ addresses”. The picture of the readers and the figure of the writer are equally colourless and indistinct. In the letters of Paul, there speaks to us a commanding personality—though, indeed, he had no wish to speak to us at all; every sentence is the pulse-throb of a human heart, and, whether charmed or surprised, we feel at least the ‘‘ touch of nature’. But what meets us in the Epistle of James is a great subject rather than a great man, Christianity itself rather than a Christian personality. It has lately become the custom, in some quarters, to designate the book as a homily. We doubt whether much is gained by so doing, for the term homily, as applied to any of the writings of early Christianity, 1s itself ambiguous and in need of elucidation ; it probably needs to be broken up in the same way as “letier’’. But that designation, at least, gives expression to the conviction that the book in question is wholly different in character from a letter. In the same way, the recognition of the fact that the Catholic Epistles in general are not real letters, 1s evinced by the instinctive judgment passed on them by the Bible-reading community. The Epistle of James and particularly the First Epistle of Peter, one may say, are examples of those New Testament
δά BIBLE STUDIES. [246, 247
“letters”. which play a most important part in popular religion, while the Second Letter to the Corinthians, for instance, must certainly be counted among the least- known parts of the Bible. And naturally so; the latter, properly speaking, was adapted only to the needs of the Corinthians, while later readers know not what to make of it. They seek out a few detached sayings, but the connection is not perceived ; in it, truly, they find some things hard to be understood. But those epistles were adapted to Christians in general; they are ecumenical, and, as such, have a force the persistence of which is not affected by any vicissitude of time. Moreover, it also follows from their character as epistles that the question of authenticity is not nearly so important for them as for the Pauline letters. Itis allowable that in the epistle the personality of the writer should be less prominent; whether it is completely veiled, as, for in- stance, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, or whether it modestly hides itself behind some great name of the past, as in other cases, does not matter; considered in the lght of ancient literary practices, this 15 not only not strange, but in reality quite natural.—Finally, we may consider the Pastoral Epistles and the Seven Messages in the Apocalypse in regard to the question whether they are epistles. Though it seems to the author not impossible that the former have had worked into them genuine elements of a letter or letters of Paul, he would answer the question in the affirmative. The Seven Epistles of the Book of Revelation, again, differ from the rest in the fact that they do not form books by them- selves, nor constitute one book together, but only a portion of a book. It is still true, however, that they are not letters. All seven are constructed on a single definite plan,—while, taken separately, they are not intelligible, or, at least, not completely so; their chief interest les in their mutual cor- respondence, which only becomes clear by a comprehensive comparison of their separate clauses: the censure of one church is only seen in its full severity when contrasted with the praise of another.
16. There is now no need, let us hope, of demon-

247, 248] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 55
strating that the distinction between letters and epistles does not end in mere judgments as to their respective values. We would be the last to ignore the great value of, say, the Epistle of James or the Epistles of Peter; a com- parison of these writings with the Epistle of Jeremiah, for example, and many of the Graeco-Roman epistles, would be sufficient to guard us against that. In regard to the latter, one must frequently marvel at the patience of a public which could put up with the sorry stuff occasionally given to it as epistles. The more definitely we assign to the New Testament epistles a place in ancient epistolography, the more clearly will they themselves convince us of their own special excellence. But our distinction proves itself, as a principle of method, to be of some importance in other re- spects, and we may, in conclusion, gather up our methodo- logical inferences in brief form as follows (some of these have already been indicated here and there).
(1) The historical criticism of early Christian writings must guard against conceiving of the New Testament as a collection of homogeneous compositions, and must give due weight to the pre-literary character of certain parts of it. The literary portions must be investigated in regard to their formal similarity with Graeco-Latin and Jewish literature ; further, this line of connection must be prolonged well into the Patristic literature. The much-discussed question, whether we should view the whole subject as the History of Early Christian Literature or as the Introduction to the New Testament, is a misleading one; the alternatives contain a snnilar error, the former implying that some, the latter that ali, of the constituent parts of the New Testament should be considered from a point of view under which they did not originally stand: the former, in regarding even the real letters as literature; the latter, in seeking its facts in a historical connection in which they did not take their rise. The history of the collection and publication of the non- hterary writings of primitive Christianity, and the history of the canonisation of the writings which subsequently became
56 BIBLE STUDIES. [248, 249
literature, or were literary from the first, constitute, each of them, a distinct field of study.
(2) The letters of Paul afford a fixed starting-point for the history of the origin of the early Christian “letters”. We must ask ourselves whether it is conceivable that the literary temperament and the epistles which were its outcome can be older than the letters of Paul.
(3) The collection and publication! of the letters of Paul was indirectly influenced by the analogy of other col- lections of letters? made in ancient times.? The only pos- sible motive of such collecting and publishing was reverential love. Once the letters of Paul had been collected and treated as literature, they in turn, thus misconceived, pro- duced a literary impulse. We must, then, carefully weigh the possibility that their collection and publication may form a terminus post quem for the composition of the early Christian epistles.
(4) The sources by means of which we are enabled to judge of the knowledge of the New Testament letters which was possessed by Christians of the post-apostolic period, the so-called testimonia, and specially the testimonia e silentio, have an altogether different historical value according as they relate to letters or epistles. The silentiwm regarding the
1 That is to say, of course, publication within Christianity.
2 Hispecially those which were made on! behalf of a definite circle of readers.
5. Τὸ is not likely that the collection was made all at one time. It may be assumed that the Letter to Philemon, for instance, was a relatively late addition. The collection was probably begun not very long after the death of Paul.
4Upon this point the author would specially desire to recommend a perusal of the sketch of the earliest dissemination of the New Testament letters in B. Weiss’s Lehrbuch der Einleitung in das Neue Testament, Berlin, 1886, 88 6, 7, p. 38 ff. Many of the apparently striking facts in the history of the “evidence” which are indicated there might find a simple enough explanation if they were regarded from our point of view.
Ι

249, 250] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. ὙΠ:
letters (most striking of all, externally considered, in the Book of Acts), is really explained by the nature of the letter as such, and cannot be employed as an evidence of spurious- ness. A silentiwm, on the other hand, regarding epistles 15, on account of their public character, to say the least, sus- picious. The distinction between letters and epistles has also perhaps a certain importance for the criticism of the traditional texts.
(5) The criticism of the Letters of Paul must always leave room for the probability that their alleged contradic- tions and impossibilities, from which reasons against their authenticity and integrity have been deduced, are really evidences to the contrary, being but the natural concomitants of letter-writing. The history of the criticism of Cicero’s letters, for instance, yields an instructive analogy. The criticism of the early Christian epistles must not leave out of account the considerations which are to be deduced from the history of ancient epistolography.
(6) The exegesis of the letters of Paul must take its special standpoint from the nature of the letter. Its task is to reproduce in detail the Apostle’s sayings as they have been investigated in regard to the particular historical occa- sions of their origin, as phenomena of religious psychology. It must proceed by insight and intuition, and hence it has an unavoidable subjective cast. The exegesis of the early Christian epistles must assume a proper historical attitude with regard to their literary character. Its task is not to penetrate into the knowledge of creative personalities in the religious sphere, but to interpret great texts. As the element of personality is wanting in its object, so must that of sub- jectivity disappear froin its procedure.
(7) The value of the New Testament ‘‘ letters,” as sources for the investigation of the Apostolic age, varies according to their individual character. The classic value of
1See p. 31.
58 BIBLE STUDIES. [250, 251
the letters of Paul lies in their being actual letters, that is to say, in their being artless and unpremeditated ; in this re- spect also, they resemble those of Cicero! The value of the epistles as sources is not to be rated so highly, and, in par- ticular, not for the special questions regarding the “ constitu- tion’ and the external circumstances of Christianity ; many details are only of typical value, while others, again, are but literary exercises, or anticipations of conditions not yet fully realised.
(8) In particular, the New Testament letters and epistles, considered as sources for the history of the Chris- tian religion in its early period, are of different respective values. The letters of Paul are not so much sources for the theology, or even for the religion, of the period, as simply for the personal religion of Paul as an individual; it is only by a literary misconception that they are looked upon as the documents of “ Paulinism’’. The result of their criticism from the standpoint of the history of religion can be nothing more than a sketch of the character of Paul the letter-writer, and not the system of Paul the epistolographer; what speaks to us in the letters is his faith, not his dogmatics ; his morality, not his ethics ; his hopes, not his eschatology— here and there, no doubt, in the faltering speech of theology. The early Christian epistles are the monuments of a religion which was gradually accommodating itself to external con- ditions, which had established itself in the world, which received its stimulus less in the closet than in the church, and which was on the way to express itself in liturgy and as doctrine.—
“The Hero who is the centre of all this did not himself . . . become an author; the only recorded occasion of his having written at all was when he wrote upon the ground
‘Cf. p. 29, note 3. One may adduce for comparison other non-literary sources as well, e.g., the ‘‘ We” source of the Acts. It, too, became literature only subsequently—only after it had been wrought into the work of Luke,




951, 259] LETTERS AND EPISTLES. 59
with his finger, and the learning of eighteen centuries has not yet divined what he then wrote.”"' If Jesus is the gospel, then it must hold good that the gospelisnon-lterary. Jesus had no wish to make a religion; whoever has such a wish will but make a Koran. It was only lack of understanding on the part of those who came after (die Epigonen) which could credit the Son of Man with the writing of epistles—and to a king to boot! The saints are the epistles of Christ.’ Nor did the Apostle of Jesus Christ advocate the gospel by literature ; in point of fact, the followers of Christ learned first to pray and then to write—like children. The begin- nings of Christian literature are really the beginnings of the secularisation of Christianity: the gospel becomes a book-religion. The church, as a factor in history—which the gospel made no claim to be—required literature, and hence it made literature, and made books out of letters; hence also at length the New Testament came into existence. The New Testament is an offspring of the Church. The Church is not founded upon the New Testament; other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. The gain which accrued to the world by the New Testament carried with it a danger which Christianity—to the detriment of the spirit of it—has not always been able to avoid, viz., the losing of itself as a literary religion in a religion of the letter.
1 Herder, Briefe, das Studiwm der Theologie betreffend, zweyter Theil, zweyte verbesserte Aufiage, Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1790, p. 209.
20. Cor. 83.

iE:
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE HISTORY OF THE LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE,

/ A a A “ ἀνοίγω τὰ μνήματα ὑμῶν καὶ ἀνάξω ὑμᾶς ἐκ τῶν μνημάτων ὑμῶν καὶ
5 / ε a > \ A - 5 / εἰσάξω ὑμᾶς εἰς τὴν γῆν τοῦ ᾿Ισραήλ.


CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE HISTORY OF THE LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE.
Ever since the language of the Greek Bible became a subject of consideration, the most astonishing opinions have been held with regard to the sacred text.
There was a time when the Greek of the New Testament was looked upon as the genuinely classical ; it was supposed that the Holy Spirit, using the Apostles merely as a pen, could not but clothe His thoughts in the most worthy garb. That time is past: the doctrine of verbal Inspiration, petrified almost into a dogma, crumbles more and more to pieces from day to day; and among the rubbish of the venerable ruins it is the hwman labours of the more pious past that are waiting, all intact, upon the overjoyed spectator. Who- ever surrenders himself frankly to the impression which is made by the language of the early Christians, is fully assured that the historical connecting-points of New Testament Greek are not found in the period of the Epos and the Attic classical literature. Paul did not speak the language of the Homeric poems or of the tragedians and Demosthenes, any more than Luther that of the Nibelungen-Lied.
But much still remains to be done before the influence of the idea of Inspiration upon the investigation of early Christian Greek is got rid of. Though, indeed, the former exaggerated estimate of its value no longer holds good, it yet reveals itself in the unobtrusive though widely-spread opinion that the phrase ‘“‘the New Testament’’ represents, in the matter of language, a unity and a distinct entity : it is thought that the canonical writings should form a subject of linguistic investigation by themselves, and that it is possible within such a sphere to trace out the laws of a special ‘‘ genius of
64 BIBLE STUDIES. [58
language”’. Thus, in theological commentaries, even with regard to expressions which have no special religious signi- ficance, we may find the observation that so and so are ‘“‘New Testament’”’ ἅπαξ λεγόμενα," and in a philological discussion of the linguistic relations of the Atticists we are told, with reference to some peculiar construction, that the lke does not occur “in the New Testament ’’—a remark liable to mis- conception.” Or again the meaning of a word in Acts is to be determined: the word occurs also elsewhere in the New Testament, but with a meaning that does not suit the passage in question nearly so well as one that is vouched for say in Galen. Would not the attempt to enrich the ‘““New Testament” lexicon from Galen stir up the most vigorous opposition in those who hold that the ‘‘ New Testa- ment’”’ language is materially and formally of a uniform and self-contained character? They would object—with the assertion that in the ‘‘New Testament” that word was used in such and such a sense, and, therefore, also in the Acts of the Apostles.
In hundreds of similar short observations found in the literature, the methodological presupposition that ‘‘ the New
1 The only meaning that can be given to such observations—if they are to have any meaning at all—is when it is presumed that ‘“ the genius of the language of the New Testament” is not fond of certain words and construc- tions. It is of course quite a different matter to speak of the ἅπαξ λεγόμενα of a single definite writer such as Paul.
2 W. Schmid, Der Atticismus in seinen Hauptvertretern von Dionysius von Halikarnass bis auf den zweiten Philostratus, iii., Stuttgart 1893, p. 338. The καί which is inserted between preposition and substantive is there dealt with. The present writer does not suppose that Schmid, whose book is of the greatest importance for the understanding of the biblical texts, would advocate the perverse notion above referred to, should he be called upon to give judgment upon it on principle: especially as the context of the passage quoted permits one to suppose that he there desires to contrast “πὸ N. T.” as a monument of popular literature with the studied elegance [?] of Adlian. But the subsuming of the varied writings of the Canon under the philological concept ‘‘New Testament” is a mechanical procedure. Who will tell us that, say, even Paul did not consciously aspire to elegance of expression now and then? Why, the very μετὰ καί which, it is alleged, does not belong to the N. T., seems to the author to occur in Phil. 43 (differently Act. Ap. 2535 σύν τε---καὶ) : cf. ἅμα σύν 1 Thess. 417 and 5”,


59] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 65
Testament ’”’ is a philological department by itself, somewhat like Herodotus or Polybius, reveals itself in the same manner. The notion of the Canon is transferred to the language, and so there is fabricated a ‘‘ sacred Greek” of Primitive Christi- anity.!
It is only an extension of this presupposition when the ‘“‘New Testament’ Greek is placed in the larger connection of a ‘ Biblical” Greek. ‘‘The New Testament” is written in the language of the Septuagint. In this likewise much- favoured dictum lies the double theory that the Seventy used an idiom peculiar to themselves and that the writers of the New Testament appropriated it. Were the theory limited to the vocabulary, it would be to some extent justifiable. But it is extended also to the syntax, and such peculiarities as the prepositional usage of Paul are unhesitatingly explained by what is alleged to be similar usage in the LXX.
The theory indicated is a great power in exegesis, and that it possesses a certain plausibility is not to be denied. It is edifying and, what is more, it is convenient. But it is absurd. It mechanises the marvellous variety of the linguistic elements of the Greek Bible and cannot be established either by the psychology of language or by history. It increases the difficulty of understanding the language of biblical texts in the same degree as the doctrine of verbal Inspiration proved obstructive to the historic and religious estimate of Holy Scripture. It takes the literary products which have been gathered into the Canon, or into the two divisions of the Canon, and which arose in the most various circumstances, times and places, as forming one homogeneous magnitude,
1 Tt is of course true that the language of the early Christians contained a series of religious terms peculiar to itself, some of which it formed for the first time, while others were raised from among expressions already in use to the status of technical terms. But this phenomenon must not be limited to Christianity: it manifests itself in all new movements of civilization. The representatives of any peculiar opinions are constantly enriching the language with special conceptions. This enrichment, however, does not extend to the “syntax,” the laws of which rather originate and are modified on general grounds.
δ
66 BIBLE STUDIES. [60
and pays no heed to the footprints which bear their silent testimony to the solemn march of the centuries. The author will illustrate the capabilities of this method by an analogy. If any one were to combine the Canon of Muratori, a frag- ment or two of the Itala, the chief works of Tertullian, the Confessions of Augustine, the Latin Inscriptions of the Roman Christians in the Catacombs and an old Latin trans- lation of Josephus, into one great volume, and assert that here one had monuments of “the” Latin of the early Church, he would make the same error as the wanderers who follow the phantom of ‘‘ the” biblical Greek. It cannot be disputed that there would be a certain linguistic unity in such a volume, but this unity would depend, not upon the fact that these writings were, each and all, “ ecclesi- astical,” but upon the valueless truism that they were, each and all, written in late-Latin. Similarly we cannot attribute all the appearances of linguistic unity in the Greek Bible to the accidental circumstance that the texts to which they belong stand side by side between the same two boards of the Canon. The unity rests solely on the historical circum- stance that all these texts are late-Greek. The linguistic unity of the Greek Bible appears only against the background of classical, not of contemporary “‘ profane,’ Greek.
It is important, therefore, in the investigation of the Greek Bible, to free oneself first of all from such a methodo- logical notion as the sacred exclusiveness of its texts. And in breaking through the principle, now become a dogma, of its linguistic seclusion and isolation, we must aspire towards a knowledge of its separate and heterogeneous elements, and investigate these upon their own historical bases.
We have to begin with the Greek Old Testament. The Seventy translated a Semitic text into their own language. This language was the Egypto-Alexandrian dialect. Our method of investigation is deduced from these two facts.
If we ignore the fact that the work in question is a translation, we thereby relinquish an important factor for the understanding of its linguistic character. The trans- lation is in method very different from what we nowadays


61, 69] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 67
call such. We see the difference at once when we compare the Alexandrian theologians’ way of working with, say, the method which Weizsacker applied in his translation of the Epistles of Paul. Was it mere clumsiness, or was it rever- ence, which caused them to write as they often did? Who shall say ? One thing is certain: in proportion as the idea of 'making the sacred book accessible in another language was at that time unheard-of, so helpless must the translators have felt had they been required to give some account of the correct method of turning Semitic into Greek. They worked in happy and ingenuous ignorance of the laws of Hermeneutics, and what they accomplished in spite of all is amazing. Their chief difficulty lay, not in the lexical, but in the syntactical, conditions of the subject-matter. They frequently stumbled at the syntax of the Hebrew text; over the Hebrew, with its grave and stately step, they have, so to speak, thrown their light native garb, without being able to conceal the alien’s peculiar gait beneath its folds. So arose a written Semitic-Greek” which no one ever spoke, far less used for literary purposes, either before or after.*? The sup- position, that they had an easy task because the problem of
1 Some centuries later an important Semitic work was translated into Greek in a very different manner, viz., the original text of Josephus’s Jewish War. Inthe preface he states that he had written it first of all in his native language (i.c., Aramaic), In the work of translation he had recourse to col- laborateurs for the sake of the Greek style (c. Ap. i. 9), cf. Schiirer, i. (1890), p. 60f. [Eng. Trans.,i., i., p. 83]. Here then we have the case of a Semitic text being translated under Greek superintendence with the conscious intention of attaining Greek elegance. Thus the Jewish War should not, strictly speaking, be used as an authority for the style of Josephus the Semite. The case is different with the Antiquities—unless they likewise have been redacted in form. Moreover, it has been shown by Guil. Schmidt, De Flavit Iosephi elocutione observationes criticae, Fleck. Jahrbb. Swppl. xx. (1894), p. 514 ff.— an essay in the highest degree instructive on the question of the “ influences ”’ of the Semitic feeling for language—that at most only one Hebraism is found in Josephus, and that a lexical one, viz., the use of προστίθεσθαι = ὮΝ,
2 Cf. the remarks of Winer, adopted by Schmiedel, Winer-Schmiedel, § 4, 1 b(p. 25 f.) [Eng. Trans., p. 28 f.], upon the Greek which was really spoken by the Jewish common people and was independent of the Greek of
translation. But see the author’s remark on p. 74, note 1. 3 See below, p. 295 ff.
68 BIBLE STUDIES. [62
a
the syntax was largely solved for them through a ‘‘ Judzo- Greek”’ already long in existence,' is hardly tenable. We have a whole series of other Jewish texts from Alexandria,”
ΤῊ particular, J. Wellhausen formerly advocated this supposition ; cf. his observations in F. Bleek’s Hinleitung in das A. T.4, Berlin, 1878, p. 578, and, previously, in Der Text der Biicher Sanvwuelis untersucht, Gottingen, 1871, p. 11. But the very example which he adduces in the latter passage supports our view. In 1 Sam. 4 2" 5, the verb πταίω is twice found, the first time intransitively, the second time transitively, corresponding respectively to the Niphal and Qal of 53. Wellhausen rightly considers it to be incred- ible that the Seventy ‘‘ were unwilling or unable” to express “‘ the distinction of 8] and Hiphil, etc.,” by the use of two different Greek words. When, however, he traces back the double πταίω, with its distinction of meaning, to the already existent popular usage of the contemporaries of the LXX (i.e., from the context—the Alexandrian Jews), he overlooks the fact that the transitive sense of πταίω is also Greek. The LXX avoided a change of verb because they desired to represent the same Hebrew root by the same Greek word, and in this case a Greek could make no objection.—Regarding another peculiarity of the LXX, viz., the standing use “οὗ the Greek aorist as an inchoative answering to the Hebrew perfect,” it is admitted by Wellhausen himself that ‘‘for this, connecting links were afforded by classical Greek.” —Wellhausen now no longer advocates the hypothesis of a ‘‘ Judwo-Greek,” as he has informed the author by letter.
2 To the literary sources here indicated there have lately been added certain fragments of reports which refer to the Jewish War of Trajan, and which were probably drawn up by an Alexandrian Jew: Pap. Par. 68 (Notices, xviii. 2, Ὁ. 383 ff.), and Pap. Lond. 1 (Kenyon, p. 229 f.); ef. Schiirer, i, p- 53; further particulars and a new reading in U. Wilcken, Hin Aktens- tiick zum jtidischen Kriege Trajans, Hermes, xxvii. (1892), p. 464 ff. (see also Hermes, xxii. [1887], Ὁ. 487), and on this GGA. 1894, p. 749. Pap. Berol. 8111 (BU. xi., p. 333, No. 341), is also connected with it. I cannot, how- ever willing, discover the slightest difference in respect of language be- tween the readable part of the fragments, which unfortunately is not very large, and the non-Jewish Papyri of the same period. Independently of their: historical value, the fragments afford some interesting phenomena, e.v., κωστωδία (Matt. 271, 284 κμουστωδία, Matt. 27% Cod. A κωστουδία ; Cod. D: has κουστουδία), ἀχρεῖοι δοῦλοι (Luke 17", cf. Matt. 25 39). The identification of the ὅσιοι Ιουδαῖοι with the successors of the ᾿Ασιδαῖοι of the Maccabean period, which Wilcken advances, hardly commends itself; the expression does not refer toa party within Alexandrian Judaism, but is rather a self- applied general title of honour.—Wilcken, further, has in view the publication of another Papyrus fragment (Hermes, xxvii., p. 474), which contains an account of the reception of a Jewish embassy by the Emperor Claudius at Rome. (This publication has now seen the light; for all further particulars. see the beginning of the author’s sketch, ‘‘ Newentdeckte Papyrus-Fragmente zur Geschichte des griechischen Judenthums,” in ThLZ. xxiii. (1898), p. 602 ft.),


68, 64] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 69
but do their idioms bear comparison even in the slightest with the peculiarities of the LXX, which arose quite inci- dentally 21 So long as no one can point to the existence of actual products of an original Judeeo-Greek, we must be per- mitted to go on advocating the hypothesis, probable enough in itself, that it was never an actual living language at all. Thus the fact that the Alexandrian Old Testament is a translation is of fundamental importance for an all-round criticism of its syntax. Its ‘‘ Hebraisms”’ permit of no con- clusions being drawn from them in respect to the language actually spoken by the Hellenistic Jews of the period: they are no more than evidences of the complete disparity between Semitic and Greek syntax. It is another question, whether they may not have exercised an influence upon the speech of the readers of the next period: it is, of course, possible that the continually repeated reading of the written Judzeo-Greek may have operated upon and transformed the ‘“‘ feeling for language ”’ of the later Jews and of the early Christians. In respect of certain lexical phenomena, this supposition may of course be made good without further trouble; the parts of the O. T. Apocrypha which were in Greek from the beginning, Philo, Josephus, Paul, the early Christian Epistle-writers, move all of them more or less in the range of the ethical and religious terms furnished by the LXX._ It is also quite con- ceivable that some of the familar formule and formulaic turns of expression found in the Psalms or the Law were ‘The relation which the language of the Prologue to Sirach bears to the translation of the book is of the utmost importance in this question. (Cf. the similar relation between the Prologue to Luke and the main con- stituent parts of the Gospel; see below, p. 76, note 2.) The Prologue is sufficiently long to permit of successful comparison: the impression cannot be avoided that it is an Alexandrian Greek who speaks here; in the book itself, a disguised Semite. The translator himself had a correct appre- hension of how such a rendering of a Semitic text into Greek differed from Greek—the language which he spoke, and used in writing the Prologue. He begs that allowance should be made for him, if his work in spite of all his diligence should produce the impression τισὶ τῶν λέξεων ἀδυναμεῖν - οὐ γὰρ ἰσοδυναμεῖ αὐτὰ ἐν ἑαυτοῖς ἑβραϊστὶ λεγόμενα καὶ ὅταν μεταχθῇ εἰς ἑτέραν γλῶσσαν. Whoever counts the Greek Sirach among the monuments of a ‘‘ Judzo-Greek,”’
thought of as a living language, must show why the translator uses Aus andrian Greek when he is not writing as a translator.
70 BIBLE STUDIES. (64, 65
borrowed from the one or the other, or again, that the occa- sional literary impressiveness is an intentional imitation of the austere and unfamiliar solemnity of that mode of speech which was deemed to be biblical. But any fundamental in- fluence of the LXX upon the syntactic, that is to say, the logical, sense of a native of Asia Minor, or of the West, 15 improbable, and it is in the highest degree precarious to con- nect certain grammatical phenomena in, say, Paul’s Epistles straightway with casual similarities in the translation of the O. T. A more exact investigation of Alexandrian Greek will, as has been already signified, yield the result that far more of the alleged Hebraisms of the L.XX than one usually supposes are really phenomena of Egyptian, or of popular, Greek.! This brings us to the second point: the real language, spoken and written, of the Seventy Interpreters was the Egyptian Greek of the period of the Ptolemies. Τί, as translators, they had often, in the matter of syntax, to conceal or disguise this fact, the more spontaneously, in regard to their lexical work, could they do justice to the profuse variety of the Bible by drawing from the rich store of terms furnished by their highly-cultured environment. Their work is thus one of the most important documents of Egyptian Greek.2 Conversely, its specifically Egyptian character can be rendered intelligible only by means of a comparison with all that we possess of the literary memorials of Hellenic Egypt from the time of the Ptolemies till about the time of Origen.? Since F. W. Sturz* began his studies 1 References in regard to the truly Greek character of alleged Hebraisms
in Josephus are given by U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff and Guil. Schmidt in the already-quoted study of the latter, pp. 515 f. and 421.—See below, p. 290 ἢ.
2 Cf. the remarks of Buresch, Rheim. Mus. fiir Philologie, N. F., xlvi. (1891), p. 208 ff.
Τὴ the rich Patristic literature of Kgypt there lies much material for the investigation of Egyptian Greek. One must not overestimate here the ‘‘influence”’ of the LXX, particularly of its vocabulary. The Egyptian Fathers doubtless got much from the colloquial language of their time, and the theory of borrowing from the LXX need not be constantly resorted to. The Papyri of the second and third centuries may be used as a standard of comparison.
+ De dialecto Macedonica et Alexandrina liber, Leipzig, 1808.
65, 66] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. {Π|
in this subject there has passed nearly a century, which has disclosed an infinite number of new sources. Why, if the Inscriptions in Egyptian Greek, when systematically turned to account, could put new life into Septuagint research even then, the Papyrus discoveries have now put us in the position of being able to check the Egyptian dialect by document—so to speak—through hundreds of years. A large part of the Papyri, for us certainly the most valuable, comes from the Ptolemaic period itself; these venerable sheets are in the original of exactly the same age as the work of the Jewish translators' which has come down to us in late copies. When we contemplate these sheets, we are seized with a peculiar sense of their most delightful nearness to us—one might almost say, of historical reality raised from the dead. In this very way wrote the Seventy—the renowned, the un- approachable—on the same material, in the same characters, and in the same language! Over their work the history of twenty crowded centuries has passed: originating in the self-consciousness of Judaism at a time of such activity as has never been repeated, it was made to help Christianity to become a universal religion ; it engaged the acuteness and the solicitude of early Christian Theology, and was to be found in libraries in which Homer and Cicero might have been sought for in vain; then, apparently, it was forgotten, but it continued still to control the many-tongued Christianity by means of its daughter-versions: mutilated, and no longer possessed of its original true form, it has come to us out of the past, and now proffers us so many enigmas and problems as to deter the approach not only of overweening ignorance but often of the diffidence of the ablest as well. Meanwhile the Papyrus documents of the same age remained in their tombs and beneath the rubbish ever being heaped upon them ; but our inquiring age has raised them up, and the information concerning the past which they give in return, is also help- ful towards the understanding of the Greek Old Testament. They preserve for us glimpses into the highly-developed civi-
1 We have Papyri of the very time of Ptolemy II. Philadelphus, who plays such an important part in the traditions of the LX.X.
{2 BIBLE STUDIES. [66, 67
lization of the Ptolemaic period : we come to know the stilted speech of the court, the technical terms of its industries, its agriculture and its jurisprudence ; we see into the interior of the convent of Serapis, and into the family affairs which shrink from the gaze of history. We hear the talk of the people and the officials—unaffected because they had no thought of making literature. Petitions and rescripts, letters, accounts and re- ceipts—of such things do the old documents actually consist ; the historian of national deeds will disappointedly put them aside; to the investigator of the literature only do they present some fragments of authors of greater importance. But in spite of the apparent triviality of their contents at first sight, the Papyri are of the highest importance for the understanding of the language of the LXX,! simply because they are direct sources, because they show the same conditions of life which are recorded in the Bible and which, so to speak, have been translated into Egyptian Greek. Naturally, the ob- scure texts of the Papyri will often, in turn, receive illumina- tion from the L.XX ; hence editors of intelligence have already begun to employ the LXX in this way, and the author is of opinion that good results may yet be obtained thereby. In some of the following entries he hopes, conversely, to have demonstrated the value of the Egyptian Papyri and Inscrip- tions for Septuagint research. It is really the pre-Christian sources which have been used;”? but those of the early im-
ΤᾺ portion at least of the Papyri might be of importance for the LXNX even with respect to matters of form. The author refers to the official de- cisions, written by trained public functionaries, and approximately contem- poraneous with the LXX. While the orthography of the letters and other private documents is in part, as amongst ourselves, very capricious, there appears to him to be a certain uniformity in those official papers. One may assume that the LXX, as “ educated” people, took pains to learn the official orthography of their time. The Papyri have been already referred to in LXX-investigations by H. W. J. Thiersch, De Pentateuchi versione Alexandrina libri tres, Erlangen, 1841, p. 87 ff.; recently by B. Jacob, Das Buch Esther bei den LXX, ZAW. x. (1890), p. 241 ff. The Papyri are likewise of great value for the criticism of the Epistle of Aristeas; hints of this are given in the writings of Giac. Lumbroso.
2° U. Wilcken is preparing a collection of Ptolemaic texts (DLZ. xiv.
[1893], p. 265). Until this appears we are limited to texts which are scattered throughout the various editions, and of which some can hardly be utilised.
67, 68] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 7.3;
perial period also will yet yield rich results. One fact observa- tion appears to put beyond question, viz., the preference of the translators for the technical expressions of their surround- ings. They, too, understood how to spoil the Egyptians. They were very ready to represent the technical (frequently also the general) terms of the Hebrew original by the techni- cal terms in use in the Ptolemaic period.! In this way they sometimes not only Egyptianised the Bible, but, to speak from their own standpoint, modernised it. Many peculiarities from which it might even be inferred that a text different from our own lay before them, are explained, as the author thinks, by this striving to make themselves intelligible to the Egyptians. Such a striving is not of course justifiable from the modern translator’s point of view; the ancient scholars, who did not know the concept ‘historic,’ worked altogether naively, and if, on that account, we cannot but pardon their obliteration of many historical and geographical particulars in their Bible, we may, as counterbalancing this, admire the skill which they brought to bear upon their wrongly-con- ceived task.*. From such considerations arises the demand that no future lexicon to the ΤΙ ΧΧ 5 shall content itself with the bringing forward of mere equations ; in certain cases the
1 Τῦ is specially instructive to notice that terms belonging to the lan- guage of the court were employed to express religious conceptions, just as conversely the word Grace, for instance, is prostituted by servility or irony amongst ourselves. Legal phraseology also came to be of great importance in religious usage.
2 Quite similar modernisings and Germanisings of technical terms are found also in Luther’s translation. Luther, too, while translating apparently literally, often gives dogmatic shadings to important terms in theology and ethics; the author has found it specially instructive to note his translation of Paul’s υἱοὶ θεοῦ by Kinder Gottes (children of God), of vids θεοῦ by Sohn Gottes (Son of God). Luther’s dogmatic sense strove against an identical rendering of vids in both cases: he was unwilling to call Christians sons of God, or Jesus Christ the child of God, and in consequence made a distinction in the word vids. We may also remember the translation of νόημα in 2 Cor. 10° by Vernunft (reason), whereby biblical authority was found for the doctrine fides praecedit intellectum.
’ The clamant need of a Lexicon to the LXNX is not to be dismissed by pointing to the miserable condition of the Text. The knowledge of the lexical conditions is itself a preliminary condition of textual criticism.
74 BIBLE STUDIES. [68, 69
Greek word chosen does not represent the Hebrew original at all, and it would be a serious mistake to suppose that the L.XX everywhere used each particular word in the sense of its corresponding Hebrew. Very frequently the LXX did not translate the original at all, but made a substitution for it, and the actual meaning of the word substituted 15, of course, to be ascertained only from Egyptian Greek. A lexicon to the LXX will thus be able to assert a claim to utility only if it informs us of what can be learned, with regard to each word, from Egyptian sources. In some places the original was no longer intelligible to the translators ; we need only remember the instances in which they merely trans- cribed the Hebrew words—even when these were not proper names. But, in general, they knew Hebrew well, or had been well instructed in it. If then, by comparison of their translation with the original, there should be found a differ- ence in meaning between any Hebrew word and its corre- sponding Greek, it should not be forthwith concluded that they did not understand it: it is exactly such cases that not seldom reveal to us the thoughtful diligence of these learned men.
What holds good of the investigation of the LXX in the narrower sense must also be taken into consideration in dealing with the other translations of Semitic originals into Greek. Pecuharities of syntax and of style should not in the first instance be referred to an alleged Judeeo-Greek of the trans- lators, but rather to the character of the original. We must, in our linguistic criticism, apply this principle not only to many of the Old Testament Apocryphal writings, but also to the Synoptic Gospels, in so far, at least, as these contain ele- ments which originally were thought and spoken in Aramaic.!
1 The author cannot assent to the thesis of Winer (see the passage re- ferred to above, p. 67, note 2), viz., that if we are to ascertain what was the “independent” (as distinct, 2.e., from the LX X-Greek, which was conditioned by the original) Greek of the Jews, we must rely ‘‘upon the narrative style of the Apocryphal books, the Gospels, and the Acts of the Apostles”. There are considerable elements in ‘‘the’’ Apocrypha and in ‘‘ the” Gospels which, as translations, are as little ‘‘independent ”’ as the work of the LXX.—
With regard also tocertain portions of the Apocalypse of John, the question must be raised as to whether they do not in some way go back to a Semitic original.
70] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 75
So far as regards these Apocryphal books, the non-existence of the original renders the problem more difficult, but the investigator who approaches it by way of the LXX will be able to reconstruct the original of many passages with con- siderable certainty, and to provide himself, at least in some degree, with the accessories most required. The case is less favourable in regard to the Synoptic sayings of Jesus, as also those of His friends and His opponents, which belong to the very earliest instalment of the pre-Hellenistic Gospel-tradition. We know no particulars about the translation into Greek of those portions which were originally spoken and spread abroad in the Palestinian vernacular ; we only know, as can be per- ceived from the threefold text itself, that ‘‘ they interpreted as best they could”! The author is unable to judge how far retranslation into Aramaic would enable us to understand the Semitisms which are more or less clearly perceived in the three texts, and suspects that the solution of the problem, precisely in the important small details of it, is rendered difficult by the present state of the text, in the same way as the confusion of the traditional text of many portions of the LXxX hinders the knowledge of its Greek. But the work must be done: the veil, which for the Greek scholar rests over the Gospel sayings, can be, if not fully drawn aside, yet at least gently lifted, by the consecrated hand of the specialist.2 Till that is done we must guard against the
1 Cf. Jiilicher, Hinleitung in das Ν. T., 1st and 2nd ed., Freiburg (Baden) and Leipzig, 1894, p. 235; important observations by Wellhausen in GGA. 1896, p. 266 fi.cWe must at all events conceive of this kind of translation as being quite different from the translation of Josephus’s Jewish War from Aramaic, which was undertaken in the same half-century, and which might be called ‘‘scientific”’ (cf. p. 67, note 1 above). Josephus desired to impress the literary public: the translators of the Logia desired to delineate Christ before the eyes of the Greek Christians. The very qualities which would have seemed ‘‘ barbaric” to the taste of the reading and educated classes, made upon the Greeks who ‘would see Jesus” the impression of what was genuine, venerable—in a word, biblical.
2 The author recalls, for instance, what is said in Wellhausen’s Jsraelit- ische und Jiidische Geschichte, Berlin, 1894, p. 312, note 1.—Meanwhile this. important problem has been taken in hand afresh by Arnold Meyer (Jesw Muttersprache, Freiburg (Baden) and Leipzig, 1896) and others; cf. especially G. Dalman, Die Worte Jesu, vol. i., Leipzig, 1898.
76 BIBLE STUDIES. (71
illusion! that an Antiochian or Ephesian Christian (even if, like Paul, he were a product of Judaism) ever really spoke as he may have translated the Logia-collection, blessed—and cramped—as he was by the timid consciousness of being permitted to convey the sacred words of the Son of God to the Greeks. Perhaps the same peculiarities which, so far as the LXX were concerned, arose naturally and unintention- ally, may, in the translators of the Lord’s words, rest upon a conscious or unconscious liturgical feeling: their reading of the Bible had made them acquainted with the sound, solemn as of the days of old, of the language of prophet and psalmist ; they made the Saviour speak as Jahweh spoke to the fathers, especially when the original invited to such a procedure. Doubtless they themselves spoke differently? and Paul also spoke differently,? but then the Saviour also was different from those that were His.
Among the biblical writings a clear distinction can be traced between those that are translations, or those portions that can be referred to a translation, and the other genus, viz., those in Greek from the first. The authors of these be- longed to Alexandria, to Palestine, or to Asia Minor. Who will assert that those of them who were Jews (leaving out of account those who belonged to Palestine) each and all spoke Aramaic—to say nothing of Hebrew—as their native
| Also against the unmethodical way in which peculiarities in the diction of Paul, for example, are explained by reference to mere external similarities in the Synoptics. What a difference there is—to take one in- structive example—between the Synoptical ἐν τῷ ἄρχοντι τῶν δαιμονίων (Mark 3 *% ete.) and the Pauline ἐν Χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ! See the author’s essay Die neutestamentliche Formel ‘in Christo Jesu” untersucht, pp. 15 and 60.
2 Compare the prologue to Luke’s Gospel. The author is unaware whether the task of a comparative investigation with regard to the languages of the translated and the independent parts respectively of the Gospels has as yet been performed. The task is necessary—and well worth while.
5 Kven in those cases in which Paul introduces his quotations from the LXX without any special formula of quotation, or without other indication, the reader may often recognise them by the sound. They stand out distinctly from Paul’s own writing, very much as quotations from Luther, for example, stand out from the other parts of a modern controversial pamphlet.
19] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. TE
tongue? We may assume that a Semitic dialect was known among the Jews of Alexandria and Asia Minor, but this cannot be exalted into the principle of a full historical criticism of their language. It seems to the writer that their- national connection with Judaism is made, too hastily, and with more imagination than judgment, to support the in- ference of a (so to speak) innate Semitic “feeling for lan- guage”. But the majority of the Hellenistic Jews of the Dispersion probably spoke Greek as their native tongue: those who spoke the sacred language of the fathers had only learned it later.! It is more probable that their Hebrew would be Greecised than that their Greek would be Hebraised. For why was the Greek Old Testament devised at all? Why, after the Alexandrian translation was looked upon as sus-. picious, were new Greek translations prepared? Why do we find Jewish Inscriptions in the Greek language,” even where the Jews lived quite by themselves, viz., in the Roman catacombs? The fact is, the Hellenistic Jews spoke Greek, prayed in Greek, sang psalms in Greek, wrote in Greek, and produced Greek literature ; further, their best minds thought in Greek.? While we may then continue, in critically examin- ing the Greek of a Palestinian writer, to give due weight to the influence of his Semitic “ feeling for language,’’—an influence, unfortunately, very difficult to test—the same pro- cedure is not justified with regard to the others. How should the Semitic ‘‘spirit of language’’ have exercised influence
1 This was probably the case, e.g., with Paul, who according to Acts 21% could speak in the ‘‘ Hebrew language”. That means probably the Aramaic.
2So far as the author is aware no Jewish Inscription in Hebrew is known outside of Palestine before the sixth century a.p.; cf. Schiirer, ii., p. 543 (= iii., p. 93 f.) [Hmg. Trams., ii., ii., p. 284], and,’ generally, the references given there.
3 Aristotle rejoiced that he had become acquainted with a man, a Jew of Coele-Syria, who Ἑλληνικὸς ἦν, οὐ τῇ διαλέκτῳ μόνον, ἀλλὰ Kal TH ψυχῇ (Josephus, 6. Ap. i. 22).—The sentence (De confusione ling. ὃ 26) [M.i., p. 424], ἔστι δὲ ὡς μὲν Ἕβραϊῖοι λέγουσι ““ pavouna,” ὡς δὲ ἡμεῖς “ἀποστροφὴ Oeov,” is of great interest in regard to Philo’s opinion as to his own language: he felt himself to be a Greek. Cf. H. A. A. Kennedy, Sources of New Testament Greek, Edinburgh, 1895, p. 54, and the present writer’s critique of this book GGA. 1896, p. 761 fi.
78 BIBLE STUDIES. [13
over them? And how, first of all indeed, over those early Christian authors who may originally have been pagans ? This ‘‘ spirit’ must be kept within its own sphere ; the investigator of the Greek of Paul and of the New Testament epistle-writers must first of all exorcise it, if he would see his subject face to face. We must start from the philological environment in which, as a fact of history, we find these authors to be, and not from an improbable and, at best, in- definable, linguistic Traducianism. The materials from which we can draw the knowledge of that philological environment have been preserved in sufficient quantity. In regard to the vocabulary, the Alexandrian Bible stands in the first rank : it formed part of the environment of the people, irrespective of whether they wrote in Alexandria, Asia Minor or Europe, since it was the international book of edification for Hellen- istic Judaism and for primitive Christianity. We must, of course, keep always before us the question whether the terms of the L.XX, in so far as they were employed by those who came after, had not already undergone some change of mean- ing in their minds. Little as the lexicon of the LXX can be built up by merely giving the Greek words with their corre- sponding Hebrew originals, just as little can Jewish or early Christian expressions be looked upon as the equivalents of the same expressions as previously used by the LXX. Even in express quotations one must constantly reckon with the possibility that a new content has been poured into the old forms. The history of religious terms—and not of religious ones only—shows that they have always the tendency to be- come richer or poorer ; in any case, to be constantly altering.! Take the term Spirit (Geist). Paul, Augustine, Luther, Servetus, the modern popular Rationalism: all of these apprehend it differently, and even the exegete who is well schooled in history, when he comes to describe the biblical thoughts about Spirit, finds 1 difficult to free himself from the philosophical ideas of his century. How differently
1 Acute observations on this point will be found in J. Freudenthal’s Die Flavius Josephus beigelegte Schrift Ueber die Herrschaft der Vernunft, Breslau, 1869, p. 26 f.
73, 74] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 79
must the Colossians, for example, have conceived of Angels, as compared with the travelling artisan who has grown up under the powerful influences of ecclesiastical artistic tra- dition, and who prays to his guardian angel! What changes has the idea of God undergone in the history of Christianity —from the grossest anthropomorphism to the most refined spiritualisation! One might write the history of religion as the history of religious terms, or, more correctly, one must apprehend the history of religious terms as being a chapter in the history of religion. In comparison with the powerful religious development recorded in the Hebrew Old Testament, the work of the Seventy presents quite a differ- ent phase: it does not close the religious history of Israel, but it stands at the beginning of that of Judaism, and the saying that the New Testament has its source in the Old is correct only if by the Old Testament one means the book as it was read and understood in the time of Jesus. The Greek Old Testament itself was no longer understood in the imperial period as it was in the Ptolemaic period, and, again, a pagan Christian in Rome naturally read it otherwise than a man like Paul. What the author means may be illustrated by reference to the Pauline idea of Faith. Whether Paul dis- covered it or not does not in the meantime concern us. At all events he imagined that it was contained in his Bible, and, considered outwardly, he was right. In reality, how- ever, his idea of faith is altogether new: no one would think of identifying the πίστις of the LXX with the πίστις of Paul. Now the same alteration can be clearly perceived in other conceptions also; it must be considered as possible in all, at least in principle; and this possibility demands precise ex- amination. Observe, for example, the terms Spirit, Flesh, Life, Death, Law, Works, Angel, Hell, Judgment, Sacrifice, Righteousness, Love. The lexicon of the Bible must also discuss the same problem in respect of expressions which are more colourless in a religious and ethical sense. The men of the New Testament resembled the Alexandrian translators in bringing with them, from their ‘“‘ profane ’’ surroundings, the most varied extra-biblical elements of thought and speech.
8ὃ0 BIBLE STUDIES. (74, 75
When, then, we undertake to expound the early Christian writings, it is not sufficient to appeal to the LXX, or to the terms which the LXX may use in a sense peculiar to them- selves: we must seek to become acquainted with the actual surroundings of the New Testament authors. In what other way would one undertake an exhaustive examination of these possible peculiar meanings? Should we confine ourselves to the LXX, or even to artificially petrified ideas of the LXX,— what were that but a concession to the myth of a “ biblical” Greek? The early Christian writings, in fact, must be taken out of the narrow and not easily-illuminated cells of the Canon, and placed in the sunshine and under the blue sky of their native land and of their own time. There they will find companions in speech, perhaps also companions in thought. There they take their place in the vast phenome- non of the κοινή. But even this fact, in several aspects of it, must not be conceived of mechanically. One must neither imagine the κοινή to be a uniform whole, nor look upon the early Christian authors, all and sundry, as co-ordinate with a definite particular phenomenon like Polybius. In spite of all the consanguinity between those early Christian Greeks and the literary representatives of universal Greek, yet the former are not without their distinguishing characteristics. Certain elements in them of the popular dialect reveal the fact of their derivation from those healthy circles of society to which the Gospel appealed: the victorious future of those obscure brotherhoods impressively announces itself in new technical terms, and the Apostles of the second and third generation employ the turns of expression, understood or not understood, used by Paul, that ‘‘ great sculptor of language ”’.?
It is thus likewise insufficient to appeal to the vocabu- lary and the grammar of the contemporary ‘“‘ profane ᾿᾿ litera- ture. This literature will doubtless afford the most instructive discoveries, but, when we compare it with the direct sources which are open to us, it is, so far as regards the language of the early Christian authors, only of secondary importance.
1 The author adopts this easily enough misunderstood expression from Buresch, Rh. Mus. f. Phil., N. F., xlvi. (1891), p. 207.
75, 76] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 81
These direct sources are the Inscriptions! of the imperial period. Just as we must set our printed Septuagint side by side with the Ptolemaic Papyri, so must we read the New Testament in the hght of the opened folios of the Inscrip- tions. The classical authors reach us only in the traditional texts of an untrustworthy later period; their late codices cannot give us certain testimony with regard to any so-called matters of form, any more than the most venerable uncials of the New Testament can let us know how, say, the Letter to the Romans may have looked in its original form. If we are ever in this matter to reach certainty at all, then it is the Inscriptions and the Papyri which will give us the nearest approximation to the truth. Of course even they do not present us with unity in matters of form ; but it would be something gained if the variety which they manifest through- out were at least to overthrow the orthodox confidence in the trustworthiness of the printed text of the New Testament, and place it among the “‘externals”’. Here, too, must we do battle with a certain ingenuous acceptation of the idea of Inspiration. Just as formerly there were logically-minded individuals who held that the vowel-points in the Hebrew text were inspired, so even to-day there are those here and there who force the New Testament into the alleged rules of a uniform orthography. But by what authority—unless by the dictate of the Holy Spirit—will any one support the notion that Paul, for instance, must have written the Greek form of the name David in exactly the same way as Mark or John the Divine ?
But the help which the Inscriptions afford in the cor- rection of our printed texts, is not so important as the service
1 When the author (in 1894) wrote the above, he was unaware that ἘΣ. L. Hicks, in The Classical Review, 1887, had already begun to apply the In- scriptions to the explanation of the N. T. W.M. Ramsay called attention to this, and gave new contributions of his own in The Hapository Times, vol. x., p. 9 ff. A short while ago I found a very important little work in the University Library at Heidelberg, which shows that the Inscriptions had begun to be drawn from a hundred years ago: the booklet, by Io. K. Imm. Walch, is called Observationes in Matthaewm ex graecis inscryptionibus, Jena, 1779, and is not without value even at the present day.
82 BIBLE STUDIES. [76, 77
they render towards the understanding of the language itself. It may be that their contents are often scanty ; it may be that hundreds of stones, tiresomely repeating the same mono- tonous formula, have only the value of a single authority, yet, in their totality, these epigraphic remains furnish us with plenty of material—only, one should not expect too much of them, or too little. The author is not now thinking of the general historical contributions which they afford for the delineation of the period—such as we must make for Egypt, Syria, Asia Minor, Europe, if we would understand the biblical writings (though for that purpose nothing can be substituted for them); but rather of their value for the history of the language of the Greek Bible, and particularly of the New Testament. Those witnesses in stone come before us with exactly the same variety as to time and place as we have to take into account when dealing with these writings: the period of most of them, and the original locality of nearly all, can be determined with certainty. They afford us wholly trustworthy glimpses into certain sections of the sphere of ideas and of the store of words which belonged to certain definite regions, at a time when Christian churches were taking their rise, and Christian books being written. Further, that the religious conceptions of the time may re- ceive similar elucidation 15 a fact that we owe to the numerous sacred Inscriptions. In these, it may be observed that there existed, here and there, a terminology which was fixed, and which to some extent consisted of liturgical formule. When, then, particular examples of this terminology are found not only in the early Christian authors, but in the LXX as well, the question must be asked: Do the Christian writers employ such and such an expression because they are familiar with the Greek Bible, or because they are unaffectedly speak- ing the language of their neighbourhood? If we are dealing, e.g., With the Inscriptions of Asia Minor and the Christians of Asia Minor, the natural answer will be: Such expressions were known to any such Christian from his environment, before ever he read the LXX, and, when he met them again in that book, he had no feeling of having his store of words
77, 78] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 83
enlarged, but believed himself to be walking, so to speak, on known ground: since, happily for him, there was no Schleus- ner at his disposal, when he found those expressions in the LXX—where, in their connection, they were perhaps more pregnant in meaning, perhaps less so,—he read them with the eyes of an inhabitant of Asia Minor, and possibly emas- culated them. For him they were moulds into which he poured, according to his own natural endowment, now good, now less valuable, metal. The mere use of LXX-words on the part of an inhabitant of Asia Minor is no guarantee that he is using the corresponding LXX-conceptions. Take as examples words like ἁγνός, ἱερός, δίκαιος, γνήσιος, ἀγαθός, εὐσέ- βεια, θρησκεία, ἀρχιερεύς, προφήτης, κύριος, θεός, ἄγγελος, κτίστης, σωτηρία, διαθήκη, ἔργον, αἰών. With regard to all these words, and many others, common to both the LXX and the Inscriptions of Asia Minor of the imperial period, it will be necessary to investigate how far the Christians of Asia Minor introduced definite local shades of meaning into their reading of the Septuagint, and, further, how far they uncon- sciously took these shades of meaning into account either in their own use of them or when they heard them uttered by the Apostles. The same holds good of such expressions as embody the specifically favourite conceptions of primitive Christianity, e.g., the titles of Christ, υἱὸς θεοῦ, ὁ κύριος ἡμῶν and σωτήρ. The author has, with regard to the first of these, set forth in the following pages in more detail the reasons why we should not ignore the extra-biblical technical use of the expression,—a use which, in particular, is authen- ticated by the Inscriptions. A similar investigation with regard to the others could be easily carried out. Even if it could be established that ‘‘ the’? New Testament always employs these expressions in their original, pregnant, distinc- tively Christian sense, yet who will guarantee that hundreds of those who heard the apostolic preaching, or of the readers of the Epistles, did not understand the expressions in the faded formulaic sense, in regard to which they reflected as little or as much as when they read a votive Inscription im honour of the υἱὸς θεοῦ Augustus, or of another emperor
84 BIBLE STUDIES. [78
who was described as ὁ κύριος ἡμῶν, or of Apollo σωτήρ ? By the time of the New Testament there had set in a process of mutual assimilation! between the religious con- ceptions already current in Asia Minor on the one hand, and ‘‘biblical’’ and ‘Christian’? elements on the other. Biblical expressions became secularised ; heathen expressions gained ecclesiastical colouring, and the Inscriptions, as being the most impartial witnesses to the linguistic usage previous to New Testament times, are the sources which most readily permit us a tentative investigation of the process.
Other elements, too, of the language of certain portions of the New Testament can not seldom be elucidated by parallels from the Inscriptions ; likewise much of the so-called syntax. M. Frankel? has indicated what an ‘‘ extraordinary agreement in vocabulary and style” obtains between the Pergamenian Inscriptions of pre-Roman times and Polybius: it is proved, he thinks, that the latter, ‘‘ almost entirely wanting in a distinctive style of his own,” has ‘“‘ assumed the richly but pedantically developed speech of the public offices of his time”’. The Inscriptions of Asia Minor have, as the author thinks, a similar significance for the history of the language of the New Testament. It may be readily granted to the outsider that many of the observations which it is possible to take in this connection have, of course, ‘only’ a philological value ; he who undertakes them knows that he is obeying not only the voice of science but also the behests of reverence towards the Book of Humanity.®
The author has, here and there throughout the follow- ing pages, endeavoured {to carry out in practice the ideas of method thus indicated. He would request that to these
1 So far as the author can judge, this process shows itself more clearly in the Catholic and the Pastoral Epistles than in Paul.
2 Altertiimer von Pergamon, viii. 1, Berlin, 1890, p. xvii.
5. This matter is further dealt with in the author’s little work Die sprachliche Hrforschung der griechischen Bibel, thr gegenwdrtiger Stand und ihre Aufgaben, Giessen, 1898; cf. also GGA. 1896, pp. 761-769 ; 1898, pp. 120- 124, and 920-923; ThLZ. xxi. (1896), p. 609 ff., and xxiii. (1898), p. 628 ff. ; Theologische Rundschau, i. (1897-98), pp. 463-472.
79) LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 85
should be added the observations that lie scattered through- out the other parts of this book. If he makes a further request for indulgence, he would not omit to emphasise that he is not thereby accommodating himself to the well-worn literary habit the real purpose of which is only the captatio benevolentiae. The pecular nature of the subject-matter, which first attracted the author, is certainly calculated to engender the feeling of modesty, unless, indeed, the inves- tigator has been possessed of that quality from the outset.
ἀγγαρεύω.
Herodotus and Xenophon speak of the Persian ἄγγαροι. The word is of Persian origin and denotes the royal cowriers. From ἄγγαρος is formed the verb ayyapevw, which is used, Mark 1571 = Matt. 27” and Matt. 5“ (a saying of the Lord), in the sense of to compel one to something. E. Hatch! finds the earliest application of the verb in a letter of Demetrius I. Soter to the high-priest Jonathan and the Jewish people: κελεύω δὲ μηδὲ ἀγγαρεύεσθαι τὰ ᾿]Πουδαίων ὑποζύγια, Joseph. Antt. xiii. 23. The letter was ostensibly written shortly before the death of the king, and, if this were so, we should have to date the passage shortly before the year 150 B.c. But against this assumption is to be placed the consideration that 1 Macc. 10 “55. which was the source for the statement of Josephus, and which also quotes the said letter verbally, knows nothing of the passage in question. Indeed it rather appears that Josephus altered the passage, in which the remission of taxes upon the animals is spoken of (ver. * «ai πάντες ἀφιέτωσαν τοὺς φόρους καὶ τῶν κτηνῶν αὐτῶν), SO as to make it mean that they should not be forced into public work. Even if, following Grimm,’ we consider it possible that the passage in Maccabees has the same purport as the paraphrase of Josephus, yet the word—and it is only the word which comes into consideration here—must be assigned to Josephus, and, therefore, can be made to establish nothing in regard to the second century B.c., but only in regard to the first A.D.
1 Hssays in Biblical Greek, Oxford, 1889, p. 37. 2 HApAT. iii. (1853), p.155 f.
89] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 87
But we find the verb in use at a time much earlier than Hatch admitted. The Comedian Menander (+ 290 B.c.) uses it in Sicyon. iv. (Meineke, p. 952). It 15 twice employed in Pap. Flind. Petr. τι. xx.' (252 B.c.), both times in reference to a boat used for postal service: τοῦ ὑπάρχοντος λέμβου ayyapev- θέντος ὑπό σου and ayyapevoas τὸν ᾿Αντικλέους λέμβον.
This application of the word is established for the Egyptian dialect? of Greek by the Inscription from the Temple of the Great Oasis (49 4.D.),? in which there is other linguistic material bearing on the Greek Bible, and to which Hatch has already called attention: μηδὲν λαμβάνειν μηδὲ ayyapevew εἰ μή τινες ἐμὰ διπλώματα ἔχωσι.
In view of these facts the usage of the verb in the Synoptists* and Josephus falls into a more distinct historical connection: the word, originally applied only to a Persian institution, had gained a more general sense as early as the third century B.c.° This sense, of course, was itself a tech- nical one at first, as can be seen from the Papyrus and the Inscription as well as from Josephus, but the word must have become so familiar that the Evangelists could use it quite generally for to compel.
ἀδελφός.
The employment of the name brother to designate the members of Christian communities is illustrated by the
1 Mahafty, ii. [64].
3 The Persian loan-word recalls the Persian dominion over Egypt: cf. παράδεισος below.—It may appear strange that the LXX do not use ayyapos,
te., though Mar, perhaps also derived from the Persian, is found in
those portions which belong to the Persian period, and might have prompted them to use a cognate Greek substantive. But they translate both it and the Aramaic NTA in every passage by ἐπιστολή, just because there was not any Greek word formed from ayyapos for letter.—For the orthography ἐγγαρεύω cf. 111. i. 1 below.
3 CIG. iii. No. 4956, A 21.
1 What is the Aramaic word which is rendered by ayyapedw in Matt. 541?
° Cf. Buresch, Rhein. Mus. fiir Philologie, N. F., xlvi. (1891), p. 219: “The Persian loan-word ayyapedw, which was naturalised at a very early date, must have come to be much used in the vernacular-—it is still found in the common dialect of Modern Greek”’.
88 BIBLE STUDIES. [83
similar use, made known to us by the Papyri, of ἀδελφός in the technical language of the Serapeum at Memphis. See the detailed treatment of it in A. Peyron,! Leemans,? Brunet de Presle,* and Kenyon.*—.ded¢es also occurs in the usage of religious associations of the imperial period as applied to the members, cf. Schiirer, in the Sitzwngsberichte der Berliner Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1897, p. 207 ff., and Cumont, Hypsistos, Brussels, 1897, Ὁ. 19.
ἀναστρέφομαι. The moral signification se gerere in 2 Cor. 1™, Eph. 25, 1 Pet. 117, Ὁ Pet, 2 Heb: 10) 35. [9.15.1 Dim. 3M asallustrated by Grimm,’ needlessly, by the analogy of the Hebrew qn.
It is found in the Inscription of Pergamus No. 224 A® (middle of the second century B.c.), where it is said of some high official of the king ἐν πᾶσιν κα[ιροῖς ἀμέμπτως καὶ ἀδ]εῶς avaoTtpepouevos.—Further examples in IIT. Π|. 1.
ἀναφάλαντος. LXX Lev. 13" = 133, forehead-bald, frequent in personal descriptions in the Papyni of 237, 230 and 225 B.c. ; Τ cf. ava- φαλάντωμα = ΓΙ͂ΞΆ, LXX Lev. 155. Ὁ
ἀναφέρω.
In 1 Pet. 2” it is said of Christ: ὃς τὰς ἁμαρτίας ἡμῶν αὐτὸς ἀνήνεγκεν EV τῷ σώματι αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τὸ ξύλον, ἵνα ταῖς ἁμαρτίαις ἀπογενόμενοι τῇ δικαιοσύνῃ ζήσωμεν. Many com- mentators consider the expression ἀναφέρειν τὰς ἁμαρτίας to
1 Papyri Graeci requ Tauwrinensis muser Aegyptu, i. Turin, 1826, p. 60 ff.
2 1., pp. 53 and 64. 3 Notices, xviii. 2, p. 308. Ὁ Gill:
> Ch. G. Wilk Clavis Novi Testamenti philologica*, Leipzig, 1888, p. 28.
ὁ Frankel, p. 129. The word occurs also in Polybius in the same sense. W. Schulze has also called the attention of the author to the Inscription of Sestos (c. 120 B.c.), line 27; on this cf. W. Jerusalem, Wiener Studien, i. (1879), p. 53.
1 For particular references see Mahaffy, i. (1891), Index [88], cf. Kenyon, p. 46; Notices, xviii. 2, p. 131. For the etymology, W. Schulze, Quaestiones epicae, Giitersloh, 1892, p. 464; the ἀναφαλαντίασις in Aristot. H. 4. iii. 11 presupposes ἀναφάλαντος.
88, 84] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 89
be a quotation of LXX Is. 53” καὶ αὐτὸς ἁμαρτίας πολλῶν ἀνήνεγκε and demand that it be understood in the same sense as in Isaiah:! to bear sins, 1.6., to suffer punishment for sins. But even granting that the whole section is pervaded by reminiscences of Is. 53, yet it is not scientifically justifiable to assert that the writer must have used ἀναφέρειν in the very sense of the original which he followed. The cases are not few in which phrases from the LXX, given word for word, and introduced by the solemn formule of quotation, have acquired another sense from the particular new context into which they are brought. The early Christian authors do not quote with that precision as to form and substance which must needs be shown in our own scientific investigations ; these ‘‘ practical’ exegetes, in their simple devoutness, have an ethical and religious purpose in their quotations, not a scientific one. Thus their references cannot properly be called quotations at all: sayings, n our pregnant use of that term, would be the preferable expression. The ‘ practical”’ exegetes of every age have considered the same absolute freedom with regard to the letter as their natural privilege. In regard to our passage, the addition of ἐπὶ τὸ ξύλον makes it certain that, even if the allusion is to Isaiah, ἀναφέρειν cannot be explained by its possible? meaning in the Greek translation of the book. If to bear be made to mean to suffer punishment, then the verb would require to be followed’ by ἐπὶ τῷ ξύλῳ: ἐπὶ cum acc. at once introduces the meaning to carry up to.
What then is meant by Christ bearing our sins in His body up to the tree? Attention is commonly called to the frequently occurring collocation ἀναφέρειν τι ἐπὶ τὸ θυσια- στήριον, and from this is deduced the idea that the death of Christ 15 an expiatory sacrifice. But this attempt at explana- tion breaks down* when it is observed that it is certainly not said that Christ laid Himself upon the tree (as the altar) ;
1 So with Heb. 9 35,
2 If, that is to say, the LXX treated the conceptions ἀναφέρειν and NW} as equivalent. ᾿ξ
> K. Kihl, Meyer, xii.* (1887), p. 165. + Cf. Kiihl, p. 166 f.
90 BIBLE STUDIES. [85
it is rather the ἁμαρτίαι ἡμῶν that form the object of ἀναφέρειν, and it cannot be said of these that they were offered up. That would be at least a strange and unprecedented mode of expression. The simplest explanation will be this: when Christ bears wp to the cross the sins of men, then men have their sins no more; the bearing up to is a taking away. The expression thus signifies quite generally that Christ took away our sins by His death: there is no suggestion whatever of the special ideas of substitution or sacrifice.
This explanation, quite satisfactory in itself, appears to the author to admit of still further confirmation. In the contract Pap. Flind. Petr. i. xvi.2' (230 B.c.), the following passage occurs: περὶ δὲ ὧν ἀντιλέγω ἀναφερομεν [........ ] ὀφειλημάτων. κριθήσομαι ἐπ᾽ ᾿Ασκληπιάδουιυι The editor re- stores the omission by wr εἰς ἐμέ, and so reads ἀναφερομένων εἰς ἐμέ. In this he is, in our opinion, certainly correct as to the main matter. No other completion of the participle is possible, and the connection with the following clauses requires that the ἀναφερόμενα ὀφειλήματα should stand in relation to the “I” of avturéyo. It can hardly be determined whether precisely the preposition e¢s* be the proper restora- tion, but not much depends on that matter. In any case the sense of the passage is this: as to the ὀφειλήματα ἀναφερόμενα wpon (or against) me, against which I protest, I shall let myself be judged by Asklepiades.® It is a priori probable that ἀναφέρειν τὰ ὀφειλήματα is a forensic technical expression: he who imposes* the debts of another upon a third desires to free the former
1 Mahaffy, i. [47]. 3 ἐπί were equally possible; cf. p. 91, note 1.
> Mahaffy, i. [48], translates: ‘‘ But concerning the debts charged against me, which I dispute, I shall submit to the decision of Asklepiades ”’.
4 Tt is true that ἀναφέρειν occurs also in the technical sense of referre (cf., besides the dictionaries, A. Peyron, i., p. 110), frequently even in the LXX, and one might also translate the clause: as to the debts alleged (before the magistracy) against me; ἀναφέρειν would then mean something like swe for. But the analogies from the Attic Orators support the above explanation. In LXX 1 Sam. 20) ἀνοίσω τὰ κακὰ ἐπὶ σέ, we have ἀναφέρω in a quite similar sense. Cf. Wellhausen, Der Text der Bb. Sam., p. 116f., for the origin of this translation.
86] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 91
from the payment of the same. The Attic Orators! employ ἀναφέρειν ἐπί in exactly the same way: Aisch. 3, 215, τὰς ἀπὸ τούτων αἰτίας ἀνοίσειν ἐπ᾽ ἐμέ; Lsocr. 5, 32, ἢν ἀνενέγκῃς αὐτῶν τὰς πράξεις ἐπὶ τοὺς σοὺς προγόνους.
That the technical expression was known to the writer of the Epistle cannot of course be proved, but it is not improbable.? In that case his ἀναφέρειν would take on its local colour. The sins of men are laid wpon the cross, as, in a court of law, a debt in money? is removed from one and laid wpon another. Of course the expression must not be pressed: the writer intends merely to establish the fact that Christ in His death has removed the sins of men. The nerve of the striking image which he employs lies in the correlative idea that the sins of men lie no more upon them. The forensic metaphor in Col. 2 is at least quite as bold, but is in perfect harmony with the above: Christ has taken the χειρόγραφον, drawn up against mankind, out of the way, nailing it to His cross.
ἀντιλήμπτωρ."
Frequent in the LXX, especially in the Psalms; also in Sirach 13”, Judith 9!!; nearly always used of God as the Helper of the oppressed. Not hitherto authenticated in extra-biblical literature.° The word 15 found in Pap. Lond. xxi.® (158-157 B.c.), in a petition to the king and queen, in which the petitioner says that he finds his καταφυγή in them, and that they are his ἀντιλήμπτορες ; cf. the similar con- Junction of καταφυγή and ἀντιλήμπτωρ in LXX 2 Sam. 22°.
1 A. Blackert, De praepositionwm apud oratores Atticos usu quaestiones selectae, Marp. Catt., 1894, p. 45.
2 Cf. also the other forensic expressions of the section: κρίνειν ver. “9, and δικαιοσύνη ver. 33.
5. Sin is often viewed as a debt in the early Christian sphere of thought. —Cf. III. iii. 2 below.
+ With regard to the orthography, cf. the Programme of W. Schulze, Orthographica, Marburg, 1894, i., p. xiv. ff.; Winer-Schmiedel, ὃ 5, 30 (p. 64).
5 τε Peculiar to the LXX,”’ Cremer’, p. 554 (= °587). δ Kenyon, p..38.
92 BIBLE STUDIES. [87, 88
ἀντίλημψις."
Frequent, in the LXX and the Apocryphal books, for Help. This meaning is not? peculiar to ‘‘ biblical” Greek, but occurs frequently in petitions to the Ptolemies: Pap. Par. 26 * (163-162 B.c.), Pap. Lond. xxiii.t (158-157 B.c.), Pap. Par. δὲ (131 B.c.), Pap. Lugd. A® (Ptolemaic period); always synonymous with βοήθεια. The last two passages yield the combination τυχεῖν ἀντιλήμψεως 7 which also occurs in 2 Macc. 157 and 3 Macc. 2**.—See further III. in. 3 below.
This meaning of the word (known also to Paul, 1 Cor. 12 *), like that of ἀντιλήμπτωρ, was found by the LXX, as it appears, in the obsequious official language of the Ptolemaic period. One understands how they could, with- out the slightest difficulty, transfer such terms of the canting and covetous court speech to religious matters when one reads of the royal pair being addressed as ὑμᾶς τοὺς θεοὺς μεγίστους καὶ ἀντιλήμπτορας, Pap. Lond. xxii.8 (158-157 B.c.); the worship of the monarch had emasculated the conception θεός, and thus ἀντιλήμπτωρ and ἀντίλημψις had already acquired a kind of religious nimbus.
ἀξίωμα.
The LXX translate the words Mw Pa (Histher 5°20 22): Piero (Ps. 118 [119]?"°) and the Aramaic Wa (Dan. 6%), which all mean request, desire, by ἀξίωμα. The word occurs in 1 [8] Esd. 84 in the same sense. It is ‘‘ very infrequent in this signification; the lexica cite it, in prose, only from Plutarch, Conviv. disput. 11. 19 (p. 632 C)”*. The Inscriptions confirm the accuracy of its usage in the LXX: fragment of a royal decree to the inhabitants of Hierocome (date ?) from
1 For the orthography cf. p. 91, note 4. 2 Contra Cremer’, p. 554 (= °587); Clavis®, p. 34.
® Notices, xviii. 2, p. 276. 4 Kenyon, p. 38. > Notices, xviii. 2, p. 175. ὁ Leemans, i., p. 3. 7 Upon this cf. Leemans, i., p. 5. δ Kenyon, p. 38.
9 Frinkel, Altertiimer von Pergamon, viii. 1, Ὁ. 13 ἔν
88, 89] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 93
Tralles;! a decree of the Abderites (before 146 B.c.) from Teos ;? Inscription of Pergamus No. 13 (soon after 263 B.c.).? “ΤῊ all these examples the word signifies a request preferred before a higher tribunal, thus acquiring the sense of ‘petition’ or ‘memorial’ ’’*.
» /
ἀπό. Of the construction 2 Mace. 14 ἀπὸ τοῦ βελτίστου in the most honourable way, in which one might suspect an un-Greek turn of expression, many examples can be found in
the Inscriptions, as also in Dionysius of Halicarnassus and Plutarch.°
ἀρεταλογία."
O. F. Fritzsche’ still writes Sirach 86.159 (4°16 in other editions) as follows: πλῆσον Σιὼν ἄραι τὰ λόγιά σου Kai ἀπὸ τῆς δόξης σου τὸν λαόν σου. M. W. L. de Wette implies the same text by his rendering: Fill Zion with the praise of Thy promises, and Thy people with Thy glory ; he takes* ὧραι in the sense of laudibus extollere, celebrare, and thus the verbal trans- lation would run: Full Zion, in order to extol Thy declarations, and Thy people with Thy glory. But against this Fritzsche’® makes the objection that ἄραι must stand here in the sense of NWI, and this, again, should be taken as receive, obtain, although, indeed, such a meaning cannot be vouched for by any quite analogous example. But leaving aside the fact that it 1s not good procedure to illustrate an obscure translation by referring
1 Waddington, iii. (Ph. Le Bas et W. H. Waddington, Inscriptions grecques et lates recueillies en Gréce et en Asie Minewre, vol. 111., part 2, Paris, 1870), No. 1652 (p. 390).
2 Bull. de corr. hell. iv. (1880), p. 50 = Guil. Dittenberger, Sylloge mscriptionum Graecarum, Leipzig, 1883, No. 228.
3 Wrankel, p. 12. 4 Thid., p. 14. 5 References in Frankel, p. 16.
ὁ Upon this cf. also the investigations of Meister, Berichte der Kgl. Sdichsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften, 1891, p. 13 ff., to which Wendland has called attention (Deutsche Litteraturzeitung, 1895, p. 902).
7 Inbri apocryphi Veteris Testamenti Graece, Leipzig, 1871, p. 475. Similarly the corrected text of 1887 in the edition of L. van Hss.
8 Cf. on this Ο. F. Fritzsche, HApAT. v. (1859), p. 201. 5 Thid.
94 BIBLE STUDIES. [89, 90
to a meaning of the possible original which cannot be authen- ticated, the confusion of the parallelismus membrorum which, with their reading, disfigures the verse, must be urged against de Wette and Fritzsche... What then is the authority for this reading? The beginning of the verse has been handed down in the three principal Codices in the following forms :—
SA πλησονσιωναρεταλογιασοῦυ, ΒΒ πλησονσιωναρεταλογίασσου,
Be πλησιονσιωναραιταλογιασου.
The last reading, that of the second reviser of B, has thus become the standard, except that the πλῆσον of the others has been retained instead of the πλησίον which it gives. H. B. Swete” considers it probable that also the ape of 8A is to be taken as equivalent to apac; in such case the current text would be supported by SA as well. But in reality the matter stands quite otherwise; it is B which sives the original text: πλῆσον Σιὼν ἀρεταλογίας σου," RA is deduced from this by the hemigraphy of the oo in apeta- λογιασσου, and B is a correction by the misunderstood NA. The unwillingness to recognise this true state of the case (Fritzsche says of B’s reading: sed hoc quidem hic mnullo modo locum habere potest) and indeed, to go further back, the alteration * which was made by the reviser of B, who mis- understood the text, are due to a misconception of what ἀρεταλογία meant. If we consult, e.g., Pape,? under ἀρετα-
1 De Wette, guided by a true feeling, has obviated this objection by rendering apa by a substantive.
2 Textual-critical note to the passage in his edition of the LXX, Cambridge, 1887 ff.
5. This is placed in the text by Tischendorf and Swete.
4 From his standpoint a fairly good conjecture !
5 Naturally the word is not given in the lexica to the Greek Old Testa- ment or the Apocrypha; nor is it given by Tromm, either in the Concordance or in the accompanying Lexicon to the Hexapla by B. de Montfaucon and L. Bos. The Concordance of H. Hatch and H. A. Redpath, Oxford, 1892 ff., which takes into account the variants of the most important manuscripts, was the first to bring the misunderstood word to its rightful position; although that book seems to err by excess of good when it constructs from the clerical error of NA a new word ἀρεταλόγιον.
90, 91] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 95
λογία, we find that its meaning is given as buffoonery (Possen- reisseret). Now it is clear that God cannot be invited to fill Zion with “‘aretalogy ᾿᾿ in this sense; then comes the too precipitate deduction that the text must read differently, instead of the question whether the lexicon may not perhaps be in need of a correction. Even Symmachus, Ps. 29 [80], could have answered the question: in that passage he renders the word 713) (shouting for joy) of the original by aperadoyia,' while he always translates it elsewhere by εὐφημία. The equation of Symmachus, ἀρεταλογία = εὐφημία, which can be inferred from this, and the parallelism of the passage in Sirach, ἀρεταλογία || δόξα, mutually explain and support each other, and force us to the assumption that both translators used ἀρεταλογία sensu bono, 1.6., of the glorifying of God. The assumption is so obvious as to require no further support ; for, to argue from the analogies, it is indisputable that the word, the etymology of which is certainly clear enough, at first simply meant, as a matter of course, the speaking of the ἀρεταί, and only then received the bad secondary signification. As to the meaning of ἀρετή which is the basis of this usage, ef. the next article. ἀρετή."
The observations of Hatch* upon this word have added nothing new to the article ἀρετή in Cremer, and have ignored what is there (as it seems to the author) established beyond doubt, viz., that the LXX, in rendering TW magnificence, splendour (Hab. 3° and Zech. 6.15) and nonin, glory, praise, by ἀρετή, are availing themselves of an already-existent linguistic usage. The meaning of dpetadoyia is readily deduced from this usage: the word signifies the same as is elsewhere expressed by means of the verbal constructions, LXX Is. 42” τὰς ἀρετὰς αὐτοῦ [θεοῦ] ἀναγγέλλειν, LXX
Field, ii., p. 180. The Hexaplar Syriac thereupon in its turn took this word of Symmachus not 88 Ξε εὐφημία, but as=acceptio eloquit, Field, ibid. 2 Cf. p. 93, note 6. 3 Hssays, p. 40 f. 4+That is, ἀρετή as synonymous with δόξα. The word may be used in this sense in 4 Mace. 10! also (contra Cremer”, p. 154 = ὃ, p. 164).
90 BIBLE STUDIES. [91, 92
Is. 487! tas ἀρετάς μου [θεοῦ] διηγεῖσθαι, 1 Pet. 2° τὰς ἀρετὰς [θεοῦ] ἐξαγγέλλειν. It seems to the author the most probable interpretation that the ἀρεταί of the last passage stands, as in the LXX, for laudes, seeing that the phrase looks like an allusion to LXX Is. 42”, more clearly still to Is. 48 °*. One must nevertheless reckon with the possibility that the word is used here in a different sense, to which reference has recently been made by Sal. Reinach,! and which no doubt many a reader of the above-cited passages from the LXX, not knowing the original, found in these phrases. Reinach, arguing from an Inscription from Asia Minor belonging to the imperial period, advocates the thesis” that ἀρετή, even in pre-Christian usage, could mean miracle, effet surnaturel. He thinks that this is confirmed by a hitherto unobserved signi- fication of the word ἀρεταλόγος, which, in several places, should not be interpreted in the usual bad sense of one who babbles about virtues, buffoon, etc., but rather as a technical designation of the interpréte de miracles, exégéte who occupied an official position in the personnel of certain sanctuaries.* The author is unable to speak more particularly about the latter point, although it does perhaps cast a clearer light upon our apetadoyia. He believes however that he can point to other passages in which the ἀρετή of God signifies, not the righteousness, nor yet the praise of God, but the manifestation of His power. Guided by the context, we must translate Joseph. Antt. xvil. 56, αὖθις ἐνεπαρῴώνει τῇ ἀρετῇ τοῦ θείου: he sinned, as if intoxicated, against God’s manifestation of His power.* Still clearer is a passage from a hymn to Hermes, Pap. Lond, xlvi. 418 .° :—
” / lal lal Ψ Lo / ὄφρα τε μαντοσύνας ταῖς σαῖς apeTtatot λάβοιμι.
1 Les Arétalogues dans Vantiquité, Bull. de corr. hell. ix. (1885), p. 257 ff. The present writer is indebted to W. Schulze for the reference to this essay.
2'P. 264. 3 P. 264 f.
4 The correct interpretation in Cremer’, p. 153 (= ὃ, p. 163 f.), also points to this. But in the other passage there discussed after Krebs, Joseph. Antz. Xvii. 55, ἀρετή most probably denotes virtue.
5 Kenyon, p. 78 f.; Wessely, i. p. 1388; A. Dieterich, Abrawas, p. 64. The Papyrus was written in the fourth century a.p.; the present writer cannot decide as to the date of the composition, particularly of line 400 f., but considers that it may, without risk, be set still further back,
92, 98] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 97
The original has pavtocvrvats; the emendation μαντο- σύνας (better than the alternative μαντοσύνης also given by Kenyon) seems to be established.!' It can only mean: that I may obtain the art of clairvoyance by the manifestations of Thy power, and this meaning allows the text to remain otherwise unaltered (after A. Dieterich). This sense of ἀρεταί seems to have been unknown to other two editors; but they, too, have indicated, by their conjectures, that the word cannot signify virtues. Wessely” emends thus :—
” ΄ lol an Es > / ὄφρα TE μαντοσύνης τῆς σῆς μέρος ἀντιλάβοιμι, and Herwerden 5 writes :— ὄφρα TE μαντοσύνην Tals σαῖς ἀρεταῖσι (? χαρίτεσσι) λάβοιμι.
We must in any case, in 2 Pet. 13, reckon with this meaning of ἀρετή, still further examples of which could doubtless be found. A comparison of this passage with the Inscription which Reinach calls to his aid should exclude further doubt. This is the Inscription of Stratonicea in Caria, belonging to the earliest years of the imperial period,‘ which will subsequently often engage our attention; the beginning of it is given in full further on, in the remarks on the Second Epistle of Peter, and the author has there expressed the supposition that the beginning of the Epistle is in part marked by the same solemn phrases of sacred emo- tion as are used in the epigraphic decree. Be it only remarked here that the θεία δύναμις is spoken of in both passages, and that ἀρετή, in the context of both, means marvel, or, if one prefers it, manifestation of power.’
1 A, Dieterich, Abr., p. 65.
2 Tn his attempt to restore the hymn, i., p. 29.
3 Mnemosyne, xvi. (1888), p. 11. The present writer quotes from A. Dieterich, p. 65; cf. p. 51.
4 ΟἹΟ. iii., No. 2715 a, ὃ = Waddington iii. 2, Nos. 519, 520 (p. 142).
> Cremer ‘, p. 153 (=%, p. 163), guided by the context, points to the true interpretation by giving selj-manifestation ; similarly Kiihl, Meyer xii. (1887), p. 355, performance, activity (Wirksamkeit); the translation virtwe (H. von Soden, HC. iii. 2? [1892], p. 197) must be rejected altogether. Moreover Hesychius appears to the present writer to be influenced by 2 Pet. 1° when he, rightly, makes ἀρετή = θεία δύναμις.
08 BIBLE STUDIES. (93, 94
ἀρχισωματοφύλαξ.
This occurs in the LXX as the translation of keeper of the threshold (Ksther 27") and body-guard (literally, keeper of the head, 1 Sam. 287). The translation in the latter passage is correct, although σωματοφύλαξ (Judith 127, 1 [8] Esd. 3 4) would have been sufficient. The title is Egyptianised in the rendering given in KHsther:! the ἀρχισωματοφύλαξ was originally an officer of high rank in the court of the Ptolemies—the head of the royal body-guard. But the title seems to have lost its primary meaning ; it came to be applied to the occupants of various higher offices.2, Hence even the translation given in Esther is not incorrect. The title is known not only from Egyptian Inscriptions,’ but also from Pap. Taur. 1... (third century B.c.), 11.5 (of the same period), x1.° (of the same period), Pap. Lond. xvi." (162 B.c.), xxii.® (158-157 B.c.), Ep. Arist. (ed. M. Schmidt), p. 1548; cf. Joseph. Antt. xu. 22.
ἄφεσις.
1. The LXX translate water-brooks, Joel 1 39. and rivers of water, Lam. 3“, by ἀφέσεις ὑδάτων, and channels of the sea, 2 Sam. 221, by ἀφέσεις θαλάσσης. The last rendering is explained by the fact that the original presents the same word as Joel 1”, OFD8, which can mean either brooks or channels. But how are we to understand the strange® rendering of the word by ἀφέσεις 21 One might be tempted
1 Cf. B. Jacob, ΖΑ W. x. (1890), p. 283 f.
2 Giac. Lumbroso, Recherches sur Véconomie politique de l’ Egypte Sous les Lagides, Turin, 1870, p. 191.
3 Jean-Ant. [not M.] Letronne, Recherches pour servir a Uhistoire de l’ Egypte pendant la domination des Grecs et des Romams, Paris, 1823, p. 56; Lumbroso, Rech. p. 191. Also in the Inscription of Cyprus, CIG. ii., No. 2617 (Ptolemaic period), an Egyptian official, probably the governor, is so named.
4 A, Peyron, i., p. 24. δ᾽ Τοια, es Deilo: 8 Thid. ii., p. 65.
7 Kenyon, p. 11. 8 Tbid., p. 41.
9 Klsewhere the LXX translate it more naturally by φάραγξ and χεί- μαρροξ5.
10 Τὴ Ps. 125 [126]4, the “fifth” translation of the Old Testament also has ἀφέσεις = streams (Field, ii., Ὁ. 283).
94, 96] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 99
to think that the rendering has been influenced by aph,! the initial syllable of the original, but this does not explain ἀφέσεις = obs Lam. 3“, and why is it that such influence 15 not perceived in any other passage ?
The explanation is given by the Egyptian idiom. We have in Pap. Flind. Petr. 11. xxxvu.’ official reports from the Ptolemaic period concerning the irrigation. In these the technical expression for the releasing of the waters by opening the sluices is ἀφίημι τὸ ὕδωρ; the corresponding substantival phrase ἄφεσις τοῦ ὕδατος is found in Pap. Flind. Petr. 11. xiii. 2 3 (258 B.c.), but—and in this the technical meaning reveals
1 Similar cases in Wellhausen, Der Text der Bb. Sam., p. 10 f.—This supposition must be taken into account in Ezek. 47° διῆλθεν ἐν τῷ ὕδατι ὕδωρ ἀφέσεως, Which, in its connection (it is previously stated that the water issued from under the αἴθριον = atrium), signifies: he walked in the water, in the water (the nominative has been set down mechanically) of release, i.e., in the (previously mentioned) released water. So must a reader of the LXNX have understood their words ; the remark of Jerome (in Field, ii., p. 895) that the LXX had rendered it aqua remissionis, rests upon a dogmatic misconcep- tion; ἄφεσις here can be translated only by dimissio. Now the Hebrew text has water of the ankles, 1.e., water that reaches to the ankles. This is the only occurrence of D DDN, ankles, in the O. T. C. H. Cornill, Das Buch des
Propheten Hzechiel, Leipzig, 1886, p. 501, conjectures that what the LXX
translated was Σ᾿. The author thinks it still more probable that their ἄφεσις represents the dual of DDN, cessation. But the most natural
supposition is that they did not understand the ἅπαξ λεγόμενον, and simply transcribed aph’sajim, the context prompting them not merely to transcribe, but to make out of their transcription an inflected word. The present writer will not reject the supposition that this singular passage might also be explained in the following way: The Greek translator did not understand the knotty word, and translated—or transcribed—it ὕδωρ ews (cf. ἕως twice in ver. +) apes (cf. Ezek. 2716 LXX, Codd. 23, 62, 147 ἐν apex, Codd. 87, 88, Hexapl. Syr. ἐν apey; Theodotion ἐν apex, unless ναφεκ [= m 2p) read by Parsons in a Cod. Jes. originally stood there ; these data are borrowed from Field, ii., p. 842) ; Aquila, Symmachus and Theodotion, who understood the strange word, have a corresponding rendering, ἕως ἀστραγάλων (Field, ii., p. 895). From ὕδωρ ἕως apes Some inventive brain fabricated ὕδωρ apéoews, Which could then have the sense explained above. The translator of Ezekiel has, in many other cases, shown tact in merely transcribing Hebrew words which he did not understand (Cornill, p. 96).—The reading ὕδωρ ἀφαιρέσεως of the Com- plutensian seems to be a correction of ὕδωρ ἀφέσεως made purely within the Greek text itself.
Mahaffy, ii. [119] f. 5 Ibid., [38].
100 BIBLE STUDIES. [95, 96
itself most clearly—the genitive may also be omitted. ἄφεσις standing alone is intelligible to all, and we find it so used in several passages in the first mentioned Papyrus. When one thinks of the great importance to Egypt of the irrigation, it will be found readily conceivable that the particular inci- dents of it and their technical designations must have been matter of common knowledge. Canals! were to the Egyptian what brooks were to the Palestinian; the bursting forth of the Nile waters from the opened sluices made upon the former the same deep impression as did the roar of the first winter-brook upon the Canaanite peasants and shepherds. Thus the Egyptian translators of Lam. 3“ have rendered, by ἀφέσεις ὑδάτων, the streams of water breaking forth before the eyes of the people—not indeed verbally, but, on behalf of their own readers, by transferring into the Egyptian dialect, with most effective distinctness, the image that was so expressive for the Palestimians. Similarly the distress of the land in Joel 1”° is made more vivid for the Egyptians by the picture of the carefully-collected water of the canals becoming dried up shortly after the opening of the sluices (ἐξηράνθησαν ἀφέσεις ὑδάτων), than it would be by speaking of dried-up brooks.”
2. The LXX translate bain, Lev. 25, used elliptically for Jobel-year,> by the substantive σημασία sign, signal, a rendering altogether verbal, and one which does not fail to mark the peculiarity of the original. But they translate Jobel-year in vy. 1° 1-12-18 of the same chapter (apart from the fact that they do not supply the ellipsis that occurs here and there in the Hebrew passages) by ἐνιαυτὸς or ἔτος ἀφέσεως σημασίας, signal-yearof emancipation The technical expression signal-year was made intelligible to non-Hebrew readers by
1 ἄφεσις seems to bear the meaning of slwice and canal exactly.
2 Of. below, under διῶρυξ. ’[Hnglish, ‘ Jubilee’’.]
4In this way, and in no other, did the LXX construe the genitives,. as we see from ver.!; so in ver. 15, where the article belongs to σημασίας. A Greek reader indeed, ignoring the context, might understand the expres- sion thus: year of the ἄφεσις of the signal, i.e., in which the signal was given ; ἀφίημι does occur in similar combinations,
96, 97] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 101
the addition of ἀφέσεως, which comes from ver.': διαβοήσ- ετε ἄφεσιν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, where ἄφεσις =I. From this, again, it is explained how Jobel-year in the parts of chap. 25 which follow the verse quoted, and in chap. 27, is rendered by ἔτος or ἐνιαυτὸς τῆς ἀφέσεως, Which is not a translation,} but an ‘“‘explicative paraphrase”’’.? Similarly in these pas- sages the elliptical Jobel (standing in connection with what goes before) is imitated in a manner not lable to be mis- taken by an elliptical ἄφεσις.
Now this usage of the LXX is not to be explained as a mere mechanical imitation: it found a point of local con- nection in the legal conditions of the Ptolemaic period. Pap. Par. 63° (165 B.c.) mentions, among various kinds of landed property, ta τῶν ἐν ἀφέσει Kai τὴν ἱερὰν γῆν." Lumbroso ἢ explains the lands thus said to be ἐν ἀφέσει as those which were exempted from the payment of taxes, and points to several passages on the Rosetta Stone ° (196 B.c.), in which the king is extolled as having expressly remitted certain taxes (eis τέλος ἀφῆκεν). With this seems to be connected also Pap. Flind. Petr. 11. 11. 1 (260-259 8.6.) : ὃ ὅταν ἡ ἄφεσις δοθῇ ; cf. previously τὰ ἐκφόρια.
The LXX might have translated Υ Lev. 251 (the rendering of which was determinative for the whole of their subsequent usage) by a different word, but their imi- tation of the technical Jobel was facilitated just by their choice of ἄφεσις, a technical word and one which was current in their locality.
1 The expression Ezek. 461 is such.
2 Cremer’, p. 439 ( = ὃ, p. 466).
5. Notices, xviii. 2, p. 368.
+ This ἱερὰ γῆ occurs still in the (Berlin) Egyptian documents of the second and third centuries a.p. (U. Wilcken, Observationes ad histortam Aegypti provinciae Romanae depromptae ὁ papyris Graecis Berolinensibus meditis, Berlin, 1885, p. 29).
° Recherches, p.90. Brunet de Presle (Notices, xviii. 2, p. 471) gives the extraordinary explanation—with a mark of interrogation, it is true—congé mulitarre.
ὁ Letronne, Recueil des inscriptions grecques et latines de l Egypte, vol. i., Paris, 1842, p. 244 fi. = CIG., iii. No. 4697.
* Line 12 and elsewhere. 8 Mahafty, ii. [2].
102 BIBLE STUDIES. [97, 98
βαστάζω.
In Matt. 817 there is quoted, as the word of “the pro- phet Isaiah,” αὐτὸς τὰς ἀσθενείας ἡμῶν ἔλαβεν καὶ τὰς νόσους ἐβάστασεν. ‘The passage Is. 53‘ is cited according to the original, but not in the historical sense thereof,..... nor according to the special typical reference which any one, looking back from the Saviour’s healing of diseases to that prophetic saying, might have perceived to be the intention of the latter (Meyer) ; but with a free interpretation of the language. The Evangelist, that is to say, clearly takes Xap- Bavew in the sense of take away, as the NW: of the original may also signify—though not in this passage. On the other Satie it is doubtful whether he also understood βαστάζειν (6 1D) in the sense of bear hence (John 201°), an impossible meaning for the Hebrew . . ., or whether he is not thinking rather of the trouble and pains which the Saviour’s acts of healing, continued till far on in the evening, cost Him.”’! H. Holtzmann,? like Weiss, similarly identifies λαμβάνειν with NWI, and βαστάζειν with bao. But, if the author’s judg- ment 1s correct, the case is just the opposite: Matthew has not only discarded the translation given by the LXX, but has also, in his rendering, transposed the two clauses of the Hebrew sentence ;* he does not translate He bore our diseases and took upon Himself our pains, but He took wpon Himself owr pains, and bore our diseases. In that case it will not be alate but sr which is represented by βαστάζειν" The LXX
also translate SDD, in 2 Kings 18" and Job 21%, Cod. A, by Baorafer; similarly Aquila in the four extant passages where he uses βαστάζειν: Is. 40",° 534,’ 66. 15,5 and Jer.
1B. Weiss, Meyer, i. 1° (1890), p. 169. 2 HC. i.? (1892), p. 76.
8 Of. the remark below upon the Gospel quotations, sab vids.
4 Cf., with reference to λαμβάνειν = Sa0, LXX Is. 464, where the same verb is rendered by ἀναλαμβάνειν.
5 Thus A. Resch, Aussercanonische Paralleltexte zu den Evangelien, 2 Heft (TU. x. 2), Leipzig, 1894, p. 115.
6 Field, ii., p. 510. 7 Ibid., p. 585. 8 Tbid., p. 565.
98, 99] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 103
105. Of these last passages, Is. 53 deserves special atten- tion, as it approximates in meaning to the quotation in Matthew: καὶ τὰς ἁμαρτίας αὐτῶν αὐτὸς βαστάσει. Τί we should not assume, with E. Bohl,? that the quotation is taken from an already-existent version, then it must be said that Matthew, or his authority, in their independent rendering of the sw) of the original eB Baorafewv, were acting in the same way as do the LXX and the Jewish translator of the second century A.D. in other passages. It does not of course necessarily follow from the fact that the LXX, Matthew, and Aquila all use Bacragfew as the analogue of NW), that the βαστάζειν of Matt. 8 must have the same meaning as the NUD of the Hebrew original. One must rather, in re- gard to this passage, as indeed in regard to all translations whatever, consider the question whether the translator does not give a new shade of meaning to his text by the expres- sion he chooses. It will be more correct procedure to ascer- tain the meaning of βαστάζειν in this verse of Matthew from the context in which the quotation occurs, than from the ori- ginal meaning of Nw) —however evident the correspondence βαστάζειν = NID, superficially regarded, may seem. And all the better, if the meaning bear away, required here by the context for βαστάζειν," is not absolutely foreign to NW? —in the sense, at least, which it has in other passages.
The same favourable circumstance does not occur in connection with ἔλαβεν, for the signification take away, which the context demands, does not give the sense of ΠΞΕῚ
In the religious language of early Christianity the terms bear and take away, differing from each other more or less distinctly, and often having sin as their object, play a great
1 Field, ΤΙ. Awct., p. 39.
2 Tie alttestamentlichen Citate im N. T., Vienna, 1878, p. 34. Bohl finds his Volksbibel (People’s Bible) yuoted in this passage also. But the Volksbibel, or, more properly, a version that was different from the LXX, would hardly have transposed the two clauses of the original.
* Cf., upon βαστάζειν in Josephus, Guil. Schmidt, De Flav. Ios. elocutione, Fleck. Jahrbb. Suppl. xx. (1894), p. 521. Upon βαστάζω in Gal. θ 17 see VII. below, the study on the “‘ Large Letters’’ and the ‘‘ Marks of Jesus,” Gal. 6.
104 BIBLE STUDIES. [100
part; the Synonymic! of this usage must raise for itself the problem of investigating words like αἴρω, ἐξαίρω, βαστάζω, λαμβάνω, ἀναλαμβάνω, φέρω, ἀναφέρω, ὑποφέρω in their various shades of meaning.
βεβαίωσις.
‘““The seller was required, in general, i.c., unless the opposite was stipulated, to deliver to the buyer the thing sold ἀναμφισβήτητον, without dispute, and had to accept of the responsibility if claims should be raised to the thing by others. . . . If he [the buyer], however, had obtained from the seller the promise of guarantee” . . . he could, if claims to the thing were subsequently raised by others, ‘‘ go back upon the seller (this was called ἀνώγειν ets πράτην) and summon him to confirm—as against the person now raising the claim—that he himself had bought from him the thing now claimed, 7.e., he could summon him βεβαιῶσαι. Τί the seller refused to do this, then the buyer could bring against him an action BeGatwcews.”? In the language of the Attic Process, BeBaiwars confirmation had thus received the technical meaning of a definite obligation of the seller, which among the Romans was termed auctoritas or evictio:* the seller did not only make over the thing to the buyer, but assumed the guarantee to defend the validity of the sale against any possible claims of a third party. Among the historians of the ancient Civil Process there exist differences of opinion #
1 Had we a discreetly prepared Synonymic of the religious expressions of Karly Christianity—of which there is as yet, one may say, a complete want —we should then have a defence against the widely-current mechanical method of the so-called Biblical Theology of the N. T. which looks upon the men whose writings stand in the Canon less as prophets and sons of the prophets than as Talmudists and Tosaphists. This dogmatising method parcels out the inherited territory as if Revelation were a matter of a thousand trifles. Its paragraphs give one the idea that Salvation is an ordo salutis. It desecrates the N. T. by making it a mere source for the history of dogma, and does not perceive that it was, in the main, written under the influence of Religion.
2M. H. E. Meier and G. F. Schémann, Der Attische Process, neu bear- beitet von J. H. Lipsius, Berlin, 1883-1887, ii., pp. 717, 719, 720.
5. Τοτα., Datla ts
1 Tbid., p. 721 f.; Καὶ, F. Hermann, Lehrbuch der Griechischen Rechts- alterthiimer, 3rd edition by Th. Thalheim, Freiburg and Tiibingen, 1884, p. 77.
101] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 105
regarding the details of the δίκη βεβαιώσεως that might possibly be raised by the buyer, but these are immaterial for the determination of the idea corresponding to the word βεβαίωσις.
This technical expression found admission into Egypt in the Ptolemaic period. The Papyrus documents speak not only of the BeBawtns,' the sale-surety, the auctor secundus of Roman law, but also of the βεβαίωσις itself: Pap. Taur. 1.2 (2nd cent. B.c.), Pap. Par. 62% (2nd cent. B.c.)—twice in the latter passage, once in the combination εἰς τὴν βεβαίωσιν ὑποθῆκαι. How thoroughly the expression had become naturalised in Egypt is shown by the fact that we still find the BeSaiwors in Papyrus documents belonging to a time which is separated from the Lagides by seven hundred years. It is, indeed, possible that in these, as well as already in the Ptolemaic documents, βεβαίωσις has no longer exactly the same specific meaning as it has in the more accurate terminology of the highly-polished juristic Greek of Attica :° but the word is certainly used there also in the sense of guarantee, safe-guarding of a bargain: Pap. Par. 21 bis® (592 Α.}.), Pap. Jomard® (592 a.p.), Pap. Par. 21° (616 a.p.). In these the formula κατὰ πᾶσαν βεβαίωσιν occurs several times, and even the formula εἰς βεβαίωσιν comes before us again in Pap. Par. 20° (600 a.p.), having thus’? maintained itself through more than seven hundred years.
Reference has already been made by Lumbroso" to the
1 Hermann-Thalheim, p. 78.
2 A. Peyron, i., p. 32, cf. p. 120, and E. Revillout, Etudes sur divers points de droit et d histoire Ptolémaique, Paris, 1880, p. xl. f.
3 Notices, xviii. 2, p. 355.
+ The text is, indeed, mutilated, but is sufficient for our purpose.
° According to Hermann-Thalheim, p. 78, note 1, βεβαιωτής, for instance, has become nothing but an empty form in the Papyri.
5 Notices, xviii. 2, p. 250. 7 Ibid., pp. 258, 259. 8 Ibid., p. 244. 9 Tbid., p. 241. 0 Cf. above, Pap. Par. 62 (2nd cent. B.c.).
Ἢ Recherches, Ὁ. 78. But the passage belonging to the 2nd cent. B.c., indicated above, is more significant than the one of 600 4.p. quoted by him.
106 BIBLE STUDIES. [102
striking similarity of a passage in the LXX with this idiom of Egyptian Civil law. βεβαίωσις is found only once in the Alexandrian translation, Lev. 257, but there in the characteristic formula εἰς βεβαίωσιν: Kai ἡ γῆ ov πραθή- σεται εἰς βεβαίωσιν, ἐμὴ yap ἐστιν ἡ γῆ. The translation is not a literal one, but one of great fineness and accuracy. The Israelites are but strangers and sojourners in the land ; the ground, the soil, belongs to Jahweh—therefore it may not be sold absolutely: such is the bearing of the original KNMNd27 (properly wnto annihilation, i.e., completely, for ever). Looked at superficially, the εἰς βεβαίωσιν of the LXX is the exact opposite of the wnto annihilation of the original ;! con- sidered properly, it testifies to an excellent understanding of the text.2 A sale εἰς βεβαίωσιν is a definitive, legally guaranteed sale: mere sojourners could not, of course, sell the land which they held only in tenure,—least of all εἰς βεβαίωσιν. The reading εἰς βεβήλωσιν" of Codices x1, 19, 29, and others, also of the Aldine, is a clumsy mistake of later copyists (occasioned in part by LXX Lev. 21), who only spoiled the delicately-chosen expression of the LXX by school-boy literalness; on the other hand, the in confirma- tionem of the Vetus Latina * is quite correct, while the renderings of Aquila,’ εἰς παγκτησίαν, and Symmachus,? εἰς ἀλύτρωτον, though they miss the point proper, yet render the thought fairly well.
The LXX have shown the same skill in the only other passage where this Hebrew word occurs, viz., Lev. 25°: κυρωθήσεται ἡ οἰκία ἡ οὖσα ἐν πόλει TH ἐχούσῃ τεῖχος βεβαίως τῷ κτησαμένῳ αὐτήν. That they did not here make choice of the formula εἰς βεβαίωσιν, in spite of the similarity of the original, reveals a true understanding of the matter, for, as the phrase was primarily used only of the giving of a guarantee in concluding a bargain, it would not have answered in this passage.
1 Which fact explains the variants about to be mentioned.
2 In the same chapter we also found a pertinent application of ἄφεσις as a legal conception.
3 Field, i., p. 212.
103] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 107
The Alexandrian Christian to whom we owe the λόγος τῆς παρακλήσεως in the New Testament, writes, in Heb. 6", ἄνθρωποι yap κατὰ τοῦ μείζονος ὀμνύουσιν Kal πάσης αὐτοῖς ἀντιλογίας πέρας εἰς βεβαίωσιν ὁ ὅρκος. The context of the passage is permeated by juristic expressions—as is the Epistle to the Hebrews as a whole. That this Egyptian legal formula, persistent through hundreds of years, occurs here also, deserves our notice. We do not need to give it the same sharply-defined sense which it had in Attic jurisprudence (guarantee in regard to a sale):' it must be interpreted more generally ; at all events it is still a technical expression for a legal guarantee.”
The use of βεβαίωσις elsewhere in biblical literature like- wise appears to the author to be influenced by the technical meaning of the word. In Wisd. 67, in the magnificent hymn? upon wisdom, occurs the gnomic saying προσοχὴ δὲ νόμων BeBaiwow ἀφθαρσίας ; here νόμων suggests very plainly the juristic conception of the word: he who keeps the laws of wisdom has the legal guarantee of incorruption ; he need have no fear that his ἀφθαρσία will be disputed by another.
βεβαίωσις has been spoken of more definitely still by the man upon whose juristic terminology the jurist Johannes Ortwin Westenberg was able to write an important treatise*
1 This interpretation is not impossible. For a legitimate sale an oath was requisite, e.g., according to the ‘laws of Ainos” (the name is uncertain) The buyer must sacrifice to the Apollo of the district; should he purchase a piece of land in the district in which he himself dwells—he must do the same ; and he must take an oath, in presence of the recording authorities and of three inhabitants of the place, that he buys honourably: similarly the seller also must swear that he sells without falsity (Theophrastus περὶ συμβολαίων in Stobaeus, Flor. xliv. 22); cf. Hermann-Thalheim, p. 130 ff.
2 Cf. the terms βέβαιος, Heb. 27, 3°, 917, and BeBaidw, Heb. 2°, which in the light of the above should probably also be considered as technical.
* Upon the form of this (Sorites or Anadiplosis), cf. Paul’s words in Rom. 5*5, 1014f-; also James 1 δ, and LXX Hos. 27!f., Joel 15:
4 Paulus Tarsensis Jurisconsultus, seu dissertatio de jurisprudentia Pauli Apostoli habita, Franecker, 1722. The essay has often been reprinted: an edition Bayreuth. 1738, 36 pp. 4to lies before the present writer. A new treat- ment of the subject would be no unprofitable task.
108 BIBLE STUDIES. [104
a hundred and seventy years ago. Paul, in Phil. 17, says καθώς ἐστιν δίκαιον ἐμοὶ τοῦτο φρονεῖν ὑπὲρ πάντων ὑμῶν διὰ τὸ ἔχειν με ἐν τῇ καρδίᾳ ὑμᾶς ἔι τε τοῖς δεσμοῖς μου καὶ ἐν τῇ ἀπολογίᾳ καὶ βεβαιώσει τοῦ εὐαγγελίου: he is indeed in bonds, but he is standing on his defence, and this defence before the court will be at the same time an evictio or convictio of the Gospel. To the forensic expressions ἐν τοῖς δεσμοῖς and ἐν τῇ ἀπολογίᾳ, which, of course,! are not to be under- stood as metaphorical, ἐν βεβαιώσει Tod εὐωγγελίου corresponds very well, and forms at the same time the final step of a very effective climax.
That the Apostle was not ignorant of the older Attic signification of βεβαίωσις is rendered probable by a striking correspondence between the mode of expression he uses in other passages and the terms applied to the legal ideas which are demonstrably connoted by BeBaiwars. Observe how Paul brackets together the conceptions ἀρραβών and βεβαιοῦν. Harpocration, the lexicographer of the Attic Orators, who lived in the Imperial period, writes in his lexicon, sub βεβαίωσις : ἐνίοτε καὶ ἀρραβῶνος μόνου δοθέντος εἶτα ἀμφισβητήσαντος τοῦ πεπρακότος ἐλάγχανε τὴν τῆς βεβαιώ- σεως δίκην ὁ τὸν ἀρραβῶνα δοὺς τῷ λαβόντι. Similarly in the ancient “έξεις ῥητορικαί, one of the Lexica Segueriana, edited by Imm. Bekker,® swh βεβαιώσεως : δίκης ὄνομά ἐστιν, ἣν ἐδικάζοντο οἱ ὠνησάμενοι κατὰ τῶν ἀποδομένων, OTE ἕτερος ἀμφισβητοῖ τοῦ πραθέντος, ἀξιοῦντες βεβαιοῦν αὐτοῖς τὸ πραθέν ἐνίοτε δὲ καὶ ἀρραβῶνος μόνου δοθέντος. ἐπὶ τούτοις οὖν ἐλώγχανον τὴν τῆς βεβαιώσεως δίκην οἱ δόντες τὸν ἀρραβῶνα τοῖς λαβοῦσιν, ἵνα βεβαιωθῇ ὑπὲρ οὗ ὁ ἀρρα- βὼν ἐδόθη. Now, although doubts do exist* about the possibility of basing a δίκη βεβαιώσεως upon the seller’s acceptance of the earnest-money, still thus much is clear, viz., that, in technical usage, ἀρραβών and βεβαιοῦν stand
' Paul hopes, 2” (as also appears from the tone of the whole letter), for an early and favourable judgment on his case.
2? In Hermann-Thalheim, p. 77.
Ὁ Anecdota Graeca, i. Berlin, 1814, p. 219 f.
+ Hermann-Thalheim, p. 77; Meier-Schémann-Lipsius, ii., p. 721.
105] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 109
in an essential relation to each other.!' It is exactly in this way that Paul speaks—his indestructible faith representing the relation of God to believers under the-image of a legally indisputable relation, 2 Cor. 171": ὁ δὲ βεβαιῶν ἡμᾶς σὺν ὑμῖν εἰς Χριστὸν καὶ χρίσας ἡμᾶς θεός, ὁ καὶ σφραγισάμενος ἡμᾶς καὶ δοὺς τὸν ἀρραβῶνα τοῦ πνεύματος ἐν ταῖς καρδίαις ἡμῶν. Apt as is the metaphor itself, intelligible as it would be in this verse and in 5°, particularly to the Christians of that great commercial centre, it is in form equally apt. The Apostle, of course, could have chosen another verb? equally well, without rendering the image unintelligible, but the technical word makes the image still more effective. <A patristic remark upon the passage in question*® shows us, further, how a Greek reader could fully appreciate the specific nature of the metaphor: ὁ yap appaBov εἴωθε βεβαιοῦν TO πᾶν σύνταγμα.
Hence we shall not err in construing βεβαιόω 1 and βέβαιος," even where they occur elsewhere in the writings of Paul and his circle, from this standpoint, and especially as these words sometimes occur among other juristic expressions. By our taking confirm and sure in the sense of legally guaran- teed security, the statements in which they occur gain in decisiveness and force.
Symmachus® uses βεβαίωσις once: Ps. 88 [89] for MIAN (LXX ἀλήθεια).
γένημα.ἷ Very common in the ΓΙΧΧ for the produce of the land; so also in the Synoptists: its first occurrence not in Polybius ; ὃ
1 Cf. also below, 111. iii. 4.
The κυρόω of Gal. 3, for instance, which is likewise forensic, is a synonym. Cf., besides, Pap. Par. 20 (600 a.p., Notices, xviii. 2, p. 240): πράσεως τῆς καὶ κυρίας οὔσης καὶ βεβαίας.
3 Catenae Graecorum Patrum wm Ν. T. ed. J. A. Cramer, v., Oxford, 1844, p. 357.
41 Cor. 1% 5 (observe ἀνεγκλήτους and πιστός), Rom. 15°; cf. Mark 162".
Be) ΟΕ: 15 wom 419. 90. οὐ Pep. 110»19- 6 Field, ii., p. 245.
* In reference to the orthography cf. Winer-Schmiedel, § 5, 26 a (p. 55 f.). The Papyri have γένημα; cf. below, III. i. 2.
8 Clavis*, p. 78.
110 BIBLE STUDIES. [106, 107
it is already found in connection with Egypt in Pap. Flind. Petr, 1. xvi. 21 (230 B.C.): τὰ γενήματα TOV ὑπαρχόντων μοι παραδείσων, and in several other passages of the same age.”
γογγύζω.
Very familiar in the LXX, also in Paul,’ Synopt., John ; authenticated in the subsequent extra-biblical literature only by Marcus Aurelius and Epictetus ;* but already used in the sense of murmur in Pap. Flind. Petr. 11. 1x. 3° (241-239 B.c.) : καὶ TO πλήρωμα (MeN) γογγύζει φάμενοι ἀδικεῖσθαι.
γραμματεύς.
In the O. T. the person designated scribe (12D and ww) is generally the official. The LXX translate verbally—ypap- patevs—even in those passages where scribe seems to be used in the military sense, 1.6., of officers. One might conjecture that in this they were slavishly subjecting themselves to the original, the employment of γραμματεύς in the military sense being foreign to ordinary Greek usage. But their rendering is altogether correct from their own point of view: in Egyptian Greek γραμματεύς 15 used as the designation of an officer. In Pap. Par. 63° (165 B.c.) we find the γρωμματεὺς τῶν μαχίμων, and in Pap. Lond. xxi." (158-157 B.c,) the ypap- ματεὺς τῶν δυνάμεων. This technical meaning® of the word was familiar to the Alexandrian translators. So, e.g., 2 Chron. 26", where the γραμμωτεύς stands with the διάδοχος ;* ef. also Jer. 44 [87] *°—if Jonathan the scribe, in this passage, is an officer. Similarly Judg.51*.!° The following passages, again, are of great interest as showing indubitably that the translators employed the technical term as they had learned its use in their locality. The Hebrew of 2 Kings 25" is almost verbally repeated in Jer. 52”, as is 2 Kings 24'-
1 Mahaffy, i. [47]. 2 Cf. Index in Mahaffy, ii. [190].
3 He probably knows the word from his Bible-readings: 1 Cor. 101° is an allusion to LXX Num. 14?
4 Clavis*, p. 82. 5 Mahaffy, ii. [23]. 6 Notices, xviii. 2, p. 367.
7 Kenyon, p. 41. 8 Cf. Lumbroso, Recherches, p. 231.
9 On the technical meaning of this word see below, sub διάδοχος.
10 Cod. A has quite a different reading.
107] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 1.1}:
25 39 as a whole in Jer. 52. The Book of Kings speaks here of the scribe, the captain of the ποσί. But in our text of Jeremiah we read (the article is wanting before \DD) the scribe of the captain of the host. The LXX translate the first passage by τὸν γραμματέα" τοῦ ἄρχοντος τῆς δυνάμεως, as if they had had our text of Jeremiah before them ; Jer. 52”, on the other hand, they render by τὸν γραμματέα τῶν δυνώμεων, which agrees in sense with the traditional text of 2 Kings 2519. Now, without having the least desire to decide the question as to the meaning of 45D in the Hebrew O. T., or as to the original text of the above two passages, the author yet thinks it plain that the LXX believed that they had before them, in Jer. 52”,° the γραμματεὺς τῶν δυνώμεων NOW known to us from the London Papyrus, not some sort of scribe of the commander-in-chief (Generalcommando).* The
1So De Wette renders; similarly Εἰ. Reuss: the scribe, who as captain ...3; A. Kamphausen (in Kautzsch) translates the text as altered in accord- ance with Jer. 52” by and “the” scribe of the commander-in-chief. The present writer cannot perceive why this alteration should be made “as a matter of course” (W. Nowack, Lehrbuch der heb, Archéologie, i., Freiburg and Leipzig, 1894, p. 360). But it is scarcely possible, with Κι. H. Graf (who does not change the text, but explains the article as referring to the following relative clause, and translates the scribe of the captain of the host), to pronounce categorically that ‘‘ The captain of the host cannot be called a DD : that title pertains only to the people who use the pen” (Der Prophet Jeremia erklirt, Leipzig, 1862, p. 628).
2 The γραμματαιαν of Cod. A is the same form (a: = ε) with the affixed  ν of the popular dialect (Winer-Schmiedel § 9, 8, p. 89).
5. Tf the article was really taken from 2 Kings 251° and inserted in the Hebrew text here, then the translation of the LXX is an altogether pertinent rendering of the original, and the supposition of Siegfried-Stade, p. 467, viz., that the LXX read the passage in Jeremiah without mee would not be absolutely necessary. The LXX, in rendering the original by a firmly-fixed terminus technicus, could leave untranslated the WW, which was irrelevant
for the sense; the taking of it over would have ruptured the established phrase γραμματεὺς τῶν Suvduewv.—The author has subsequently noticed that the most recent editor of Jeremiah actually emends the text here by the Book of Kings for internal reasons, and explains the chancellor, under whom the army was placed, as a military minister who took his place beside the chan- cellor mentioned elsewhere (F. Giesebrecht, Das Buch Jeremia [Handkomm. zum A. T. iii. 21], Gottingen, 1894, p. 263 f.).
‘Thus O. Thenius, Die Biicher der Kinige (Kurzgef. ex. Handb, zum A. T. ix,), Leipzig, 1849, p. 463.
112 BIBLE STUDIES. [108, 109
choice of the plural δυνάμεων, which was not forced upon them by the singular of the original, is to be explained only by the fact that they were adopting a long-established and fixed connection.
Is. 36” is a most instructive case. Our Hebrew text has simply a 49D there, without any addition; the LXX, however, transfer him to the army with the rank of the γραμματεὺς τῆς δυνάμεως : they understood scribe to denote a military rank.
The military meaning of γραμματεύς has been preserved in 1 Macc. 5”;? probably also in Symmachus Judg. 514, Jer. 44 [37]*.4
γράφω.
“In the sphere of Divine Revelation the documents belonging to it assume this® regulative position, and the yéypartac always implies an appeal to the incontestable regulate authority of the dictum quoted.”® ‘‘The New Testament usage of ἡ γραφή... .. implies the same idea as is stamped upon the usage of the γέγραπται, viz., a reference to the regulative character of the particular document as a whole, which character gives it a unique position, in virtue of which ἡ γραφή is always spoken of as an authority.’’7 In this explanation of terms Cremer has, without doubt, accurately defined the bases not only of ‘‘ New Testament ”’
1 Tn this technical γραμματεύς the fundamental meaning of scribe seems to have grown quite indistinct: Is. 22), Cod. A, has preserved the translation γραμματεύς for house-steward, a reading which, as compared with ταμίας (which is better Greek), e.g. of Cod. B, decidedly gives one the impression of its being the original; with reference to γραμματεύς as a designation of a civil official in Egypt, cf. Lumbroso, Recherches, Ὁ. 243 ff. The word is common elsewhere: in the latter sense. When the LXX speak of the Hgyptian task-masters, in Exod, 5 & 10-14-15-19, as γραμματεῖς, it is not only a verbal, but, from their stand- point, also an accurate translation. They subsequently designate Israelitic officials also in this way. In LXX [5.958 15, γραμματικός is used for γραμματεύς in this sense.
2 Cf. Grimm, ad loc., and Wellhausen, Israelitische und Jiidische Geschichte, p. 209.
8 Field, i., p. 413. 4 Tbid., ii., p. 682.
> Viz., the regulative position which falls to the lot of legal documents.
ὁ Cremer”, p. 241 (= 8, p. 255). oid,
109, 110] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 118
usage but of the general idea that regulative authority belongs to scripture. Should the question be asked, whence it comes that the conception of Holy Scripture has been bound up with the idea of its absolute authority, the answer can only be a reference to the juristic idea of scripture, which was found ready to hand and was applied to the sacred docu- ments. A religion of documents—considered even histori- cally—is a religion of law. It is a particularly instructive, though commonly overlooked, fact in connection with this juristic conception of the biblical documents that the LXX translate TIF by νόμος in the great majority of passages, although the two ideas are not by any means identical; and that they have thus made a law out of a teaching.’ It is indeed probable that in this they had been already influenced by the mechanical conception of Scripture of early Rabbinism, but, in regard to form, they certainly came under the sway of the Greek juristic language. Cremer has given a series of examples from older Greek of this use of γράφειν in legislative work,” and uses these to explain the frequently-occurring “biblical” γέγραπται. This formula of quotation is, however, not ‘‘biblical”’ only, but is found also in juristic Papyrus documents of the Ptolemaic period and in Inscriptions: Pap. Flind. Petr. 1. xxx. a;* further—and this is most instructive for the frequent καθὼς γέγραπται of the biblical authors *— in the formula καθότι γέγραπται: Pap. Par. 13° (probably 157 B.c.); Pap. Lugd. O° (89 B.c.); Inscription of Mylasa in Caria, Waddington, iii. 2, No. 416 = CIG. τι. No. 2693 ὁ (beginning of the imperial period) ;* Inscription from the
1 Cf, the similar alteration of the idea of covenant into that of testament, and, upon this, Cremer’, p. 897 (= 8, p. 946).
2 The ὃ γέγραφα γέγραφα of Pilate, John 19”, is also to be understood in this pregnant sense.
3 Mahafty, ii. [102].
4In the O. T. cf., e.g., LXX Neh. 10% and, in particular, LXX Job 42 15 (in the Greek appendix to the Book of Job).
5 Notices, xviii. 2, p. 210.
6 Leemans, i., p. 77; on this Leemans, i., p. 133, remarks: “γράφειν: am contractu scribere’’.
7 As to the date see below, swb ὄνομα.
114 BIBLE STUDIES. (110, 111
neighbourhood of Mylasa, Waddington, i. 2, No. 483 (imperial period ?): in spite of mutilation the formula is still legible in four passages here;—and in the formula καθὰ γέγραπται, Pap. Par. 11 (2nd or 1st cent. B.c.), of. Ka(tT)TaTep . . . yéypam[ roe] in line sor. of the architectural Inscription of Tegea (ca. 3rd cent. B.c.)’—in all of which reference is made to a definite obligatory clause of the docu- ment quoted.? Further examples in III. i. 5 below.
That the juristic conception of sacred writings was familiar to the Alexandrian translators is directly shown by Ep. Arist. (ed. M. Schmidt), p. 681: when the translation of the Bible into Greek was finished, then, καθὼς ἔθος αὐτοῖς ἐστιν, εἴ τις διασκευάσει προστιθεὶς ἢ μεταφέρων TL TO σύνολον τῶν γεγραμμένων ἢ ποιούμενος ἀφαίρεσιν," he was threatened with ἃ curse. According to this the Greek Bible was placed under the legal point of view which forbade the altering of a document; this principle is not universal in Greek law,’ but the Apostle Paul gives evidence for it, when, in Gal. 3”, arguing e concessis, he says that a διαθήκη κεκυρωμένη can neither be made void ὅ nor have anything added to it.
Speaking from the same point of view, the advocate Tertullian—to give another very clear example of the further development of the juristic conception of biblical authority— describes, adv. Marc. 42 and elsewhere, the individual portions of the New Testament as instrwmenta, 1.6., as legally valid documents."
1 Notices, xviii. 2, p. 172.
2 P. Cauer, Delectus inscriptionum Graecarum propter dialectum memora- biliwm 2, Leipzig, 1883, No. 457.
3 Tt is not in this pregnant sense that Plutarch uses γέγραπται, but simply as a formula of quotation ; cf. J. F. Marcks, Symbola critica ad epistolographos Graecos, Bonn, 1883, p. 27. So also LXX Esth. 103.
4 Cf. Deut. 42, 12%", Prov. 30°, and later Rev. 22 18.
5 It was allowed, e.g., in Attic Law ‘“‘ to add codices to a will, or make modifications in it’’; cf. Meier-Sché6mann-Lipsius, ii., p. 597.
ὁ Upon the revocation of a will cf. Meier-Schémann-Lipsius, ii., p. 597 f.
7 Cf. upon this E. Reuss, Die Geschichte der Heiligen Schriften Newen
Testaments ®, Brunswick, 1887, § 303, p. 340, and Jiilicher, Hinleitung im das Nai 0. 9053:
111, 119] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE.| 115
διάδοχος and διαδεχόμενος.
διάδοχος occurs in the LXX only in 1 Chron. 18", as the equivalent of 3, 2 Chron. 26" as the translation of mw, and 2 Chron. 287 as the translation of Ww, In none of these three passages is διάδοχος, in its ordinary sense of successor, an accurate rendering of the original. It has there- fore been asserted by Schleusner! that διάδοχος corresponds to the Hebrew words, and thus means something like prozi- mus a rege ; he refers to Philo, de Josepho, M. pp. 58 and 64. ‘Similarly Grimm,’ in reference to 2 Macc. 4 33, has, on account of the context, rejected the meaning successor for that passage and 14°; cf. also 45} dcadeyouevos. This supposition is con- firmed by Pap. Tawr. 1. (115ana6)* (2nd cent. B.c.), in which οἱ περὶ αὐλὴν διάδοχοι and οἱ διάδοχοι are higher officials at the court of the Ptolemies;* διάδοχος is thus an Egyptian court-title.° The Alexandrian translators of the Book of Chronicles and the Alexandrian Philo used the word in this technical sense, and the second Book of Maccabees (compiled from Jason of Cyrene) also manifests a knowledge of the usage.
Allied to the technical meaning of διάδοχος is that of the participle διαδεχόμενος," 2 Chron. 31” and Esth. 103, as the translation of the ΓΔ of the original: so 2 Macc. 45,
δίκαιος.
The LXX render PTY or the genitival PTY by δίκαιος in almost every case, and their translation is accurate even for those passages in which the conception normal’ (which
1 Novus Thesaurus, ii. (1820), p. 87. 2 HApAT. iv. (1857), p. 90.
3 A. Peyron, i., p. 24.
4 Tbid., p. 56 fi. On this see Brunet de Presle, Notices, xviii. 2, p. 228, and Lumbroso, Recherches, p. 195.
> As such frequent also in the London Papyri of the 2nd cent. B.c. ; ef. on these, Kenyon, p. 9. On the military signification of διάδοχος cf. Lumbroso, Recherches, p. 224 f.
6 Of., in regard to later usage, F. Krebs, Agyptische Priester unter rémischer Herrschaft, in Zeitschr. fiir dgyptische Sprache und A lterthumskunde, xxxi. (1893), p. 37.
7 Of. ἘΝ. Kautzsch, [ Uber] die Derivate des Stammes js um alttestament- lichen Sprachgebrauch, Tiibingen, 1881, p. 59.
116 BIBLE STUDIES. [112, 113
lies at the basis of the Hebrew words) has been preserved most purely, 1.6., where correct measures are described as. just... That they did not translate mechanically in these cases appears from Prov. 111, where they likewise render the weight there described as obvi, full, by σταθμίον δίκαιον." There can be established also for Greek a usage similar to the Semitic,® but it will be better in this matter to refer to Egyptian usage than to Xenophon and others,‘ who apply the attribute δίκαιος to ἵππος, βοῦς, etc., when these animals correspond to what is expected of them. Thus in the decree of the inhabitants of Busiris,° drawn up in honour of the emperor Nero, the rise of the Nile is called a δικαία ἀνάβασις ; but more significant—because the reference is to a measwre —is the observation of Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom. vi. 4 (p. 758, Potter), that, in Egyptian ceremonies, the πῆχυς τῆς δικαιοσύνης was carried around—i.e., a correct cubit.® That is the same idiom as the LXX apply in the ζυγὰ δίκαια καὶ σταθμία δίκαια καὶ χοῦς δίκαιος, Lev. 19 36, in the μέτρον ἀληθινὸν καὶ δίκαιον, Deut. 25 15, and in the χοίνιξ δικαία, Ezek. 45 "Ὁ,
διῶρυξ.
The LXX translate flood Is. 27:15, stream Is. 33”, and river Jer. 38 [31]°, by διῶρυξ canal. They have thus Egyptianised the original. Such a course was perhaps quite natural in the first passage, where the reference is to the “flood of Egypt’: noticing that stream and river were meta-
1 Cf. Kautzsch, p. 56 f., on the inadequacy of the German gerecht for the rendering of the Hebrew word.
2 Deut. 28 15, ἀληθινόν.
3 Kautzsch, p. 57 ff. In Arabic the same word is used, according to. Kautzsch, to describe, e.g., a lance or a date [the fruit] as correct.
4 Cremer’, p. 270 ( = 8, p. 284).
> Letronne, Recwetl, ii., p. 467, cf. p. 468 f.; also Letronne, Recherches, p. 396 f., Lumbroso, Recherches, Ὁ. 290. Pliny, Nat. Hist. v. 58, speaks in the same way of the wustum incrementum, and Plutarch, de Isid. et Osirid., p. 368, says: ἡ δὲ μέση ἀνάβασις περὶ Μέμφιν, ὅταν 7 δικαία, δεκατεσσάρων πηχῶν.
ὁ Cf. also the Egyptian measure δικαιότατον μύστρον in F. Hultsch’s Griechische und rimische Metrologie”, Berlin, 1882, p. 636.
118, 114] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. ET
phorically used in the other two passages, they made the metaphors more intelligible to the Alexandrians by giving them a local colouring—just as was shown above in the case of ἄφεσις.
els.
‘““The prepositional construction came easily to the N. T. writers probably because of the more forcible and more expressive diction of their native tongue, and we therefore find εἰς in places where the Dat. commodi or incommodi would have sufficed for the Greeks, e.g., Acts 24: ἐλεημοσύνας ποιήσων εἰς TO ἔθνος pou...)
In answer to this it must, to begin with, be remarked that ‘‘the’’ New Testament writers were not the first to find the usage a natural one, for it is already found in the Greek Old Testament. The author is not now examining the use of εἰς in that book, but he can point to the following passages, in which εἰς represents the “dative of advantage” : LXX Bel®, ὅσα εἰς αὐτὸν [Bel] δωπανᾶτωι, ver.”, τὴν δαπάνην τὴν εἰς αὐτόν [Bel], with which is to be compared ver.”, ἀνηλίσκετο αὐτῷ" [Bel]; Ep. Jerem.® (ἀργύριον) εἰς ἑαυτοὺς καταναλοῦσι; Sir. 377, συμβουλεύων εἰς ἑαυτόν ( = ver.*, ἑαυτῷ βουλεύσεται). In all these passages the original is wanting, but it seems certain to the author that what we find here is not one of the LXX’s many*® Hebraisms in the use of prepositions, but that this employment of εἰς is an Alexandrian idiom.
In Pap. Flind. Petr. 1. xxv. a-i* (ca. 226 B.c.) and else- where, we have a number of receipts, from the standing formule of which it appears that εἰς was used to specify the various purposes of the items of an account. Thus the receipt αϑ runs: ὁμολογεῖ Κεφάλων ἡνίοχος ἔχειν παρὰ Xappov.....
1 Winer-Liinemann, § 31, 5 (p. 200).
2 Theodotion (ver.*) translates the same passage thus: καὶ ἐδαπανῶντο εἰς αὐτὸν [Bel] σεμιδάλεως ἀρτάβαι δώδεκα (Libri apocrypli V. T. graece, ed. O. F. Fritzsche, p. 87).
3 Cf. the author’s work Die neutest. Formel “in Christo Jesu,” p. 55 f.
+ Mahatfty, ii. [72] ff. > [bid., ii. [12].
118 ἤΒΙΒΙ)Ε STUDIES. [114, 115
εἰς αὐτὸν καὶ ἡνιόχους ζ΄ .. ἄρτων καθαρῶν β' χοίνικας ..... καὶ εἰς ἱπποκόμους uy ἄρτων αὐτοπύρων... Ks’, 1.6., Kephalon the charwoteer certifies that he has received from Charmos for himself and 7 other charioteers, 2 chenices 'of pure bread, and for 13 grooms, 26 measures of bran bread. Further, εἰς stands before non-personal words in the same way: καὶ εἰς ἵππον ἐνοχλού- μενον. εἰς χρίσιν ἐλαίου Ky καὶ .. εἰς λύχνους κίκεως κὶ β΄, 7.6., and for a sick horse 3 cotylas of oil for rubbing in, and for the lantern 2 cotylas of Kiki-oil.
Still more clear is the passage from the contract Pap. Par.®} (114 B.C.) καὶ τὸν εἰς Τάγην οἶκον ὠκοδομημένον. Further examples in III. in. 1, below.:
The same usage of εἰς, the examples of which may be increased from the Papyri, is found specially clearly in Paul : 1 Cor. 16! τῆς λογείας THs εἰς τοὺς ἁγίους, similarly 2 Cor. 84, 9", Rom. 15%; cf. Acts 24”; Mark 8”* should pro- bably be explained in the same way.
ἐκτὸς EL μή.
The commonly cited examples, from Lucian, ‘etc., of this jumbled phrase,” long since recognised as late-Greek, in the Cilician Paul (1 Cor. 14°, 152, cf. 1 Tim. 5”) are not so instructive for its use as is the passage of an Inscription of Mopsuestia in Cilicia, Waddington, 11. 2, No. 1499 (the author cannot fix the date ; certainly the imperial period) : ἐκτὸς εἰ μὴ [ἐ]ὰν Mayva μόνη θε[ λή]σῃ.
? εν.
The ignoring of the difference between translations of Semitic originals and works which were in Greek from the first—a difference of fundamental importance for the grammar (and the lexicon) of the ‘ biblical’’ writers—has nowhere such disastrous consequences as in connection with the pre-
1 Notices, xviii. 2, p. 131.—The same words are found in Pap. Lugd. M. (Leemans, i., p. 59); Leemans, i., p. 63, explains εἰς as a periphrasis for the genitive: similarly W. Schmid, Der Atticismus, iii. (1893), p. 91. One should notice in this latter work the other observations upon the prepositions—they are of importance for biblical philology.
2 Winer-Liinemann, ἃ 65, 3 (p. 563) ; Schmiedel, HC., ii. 1 (1891), p. 143.
115, 116] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE, 119
position. Theauthor considers that he has previously shown, by a not unimportant example, what a difference there is between a peculiarity of syntax in the originally-Greek Epistles of Paul and the apparently similar phenomenon in Greek translations. A similar fact may be observed with regard to the question of ἐν with the dativus instrwmenti. Winer-Lunemann ! still maintains that ἐν is used ‘‘of the instrument and means (chiefly in the Apocalypse)—not only (as in the better Greek prose-writers . . . .) where in (or on) would be proper enough ...... , but also, irrespective of this, where in Greek the dative alone, as casus instru- mentalis, would be used—as an after-effect of the Hebrew 2”. Similarly A. Buttmann.? In their enumeration of the ex- amples—in so far as these can come into consideration at all —both writers, in neglecting this difference, commit the error of uncritically placing passages from the Gospels and the Apocalypse, in regard to which one may speak of a Semitic influence, i.e., of a possible Semitic original, alongside of, say, Pauline passages, without, however, giving any indica- tion of how they imagine the ‘‘after-effect’”’ of the 3 to have influenced Paul. Thus Winer-Liinemann quotes Rom. 15% ἐν ἑνὶ στόματι δοξάζητε, and Buttmann,® 1 Cor. 45) ἐν ῥάβδῳ ἔλθω πρὸς ὑμᾶς, as Pauline examples of ἐν with the instrumental dative. The author believes that both passages are capable of another explanation, and that, as they are the only ones that can be cited with even an appearance of reason, this use of ἐν by Paul cannot be made out. For, to begin with, the passage in Romans is one of those ‘‘where in would be proper enough,” ie., where the refer- ence to its primary sense of location is fully adequate to explain it, and it is thus quite superfluous to make for ‘such instances a new compartment in the dust-covered re- pository ; the Romans are to glorify God in one mouth— because, of course, words are formed in the mouth, just as, according to popular psychology, thoughts dwell im the
1 8 48, d (p. 363). 2 Grammatik des neutestamentlichen Sprachgebrauchs, p. 157. 3 P, 284.
120 BIBLE STUDIES. [116, 117
heart. In 1 Cor. 47, again, the case seems to be more favourable for the view of Buttmann, for the LXX frequently use the very construction ἐν τῇ ῥάβδῳ; what more easy than to maintain that ‘‘ the” biblical Greek uses this con- struction instrumentally throughout? But here also we perceive very clearly the difference between the diction of the translators as cramped by their original, and the un- constrained language of Paul. In all the passages of the XX (Gen, 32%, Exod. 17°, 217 1 Sam. 17*, 2. Sam. 7%, 237), 1, Chron, 112%, Ps, 2°, 88 (89) #ads..d0% Mie. 54, 74: cf. Ezek. 39°, also Hos. 4”, where ἐν ῥάβδοις is conformed to the previous ἐν f= 2 | συμβόλοις) the ἐν of the phrase ἐν τῇ ῥάβδῳ is a mechanical imitation of a 2 in the original : it cannot therefore be maintained in any way that that con- struction is peculiar to the indigenous Alexandrian Greek. With Paul, on the contrary, ἐν ῥάβδῳ is anticipatively conformed to the following locative ἢ ἐν ἀγώπῃ πνεύματί τε πραὕὔτητος ; itis but a loose formation of the moment, and cannot be deduced from any law of syntax. It is, of course, not impossible that this anticipative conformation came the more easily to the Apostle, who knew his Greek Bible, be- cause one or other of those passages of the LXX may have hovered’ before his mind, but it is certainly preposterous to speak of the “‘after-effect ᾿ of a 3. Where in Paul’s psy- chology of language may this powerful particle have had its dwelling-place ?
5 / ενταφιαστῆης.
The LXX correctly translate NE physician by ἰατρός ; only in Gen. 50°" by ἐνταφιαστής. The original speaks in that passage of the Egyptian physicians who embalmed the body of Jacob. The translation is not affected by the verb ἐνταφιάζειν simply, but is explained by the endeavour to
'The ἐν τῇ ῥάβδῳ, which should possibly be restored as the original reading in line 12 of the leaden tablet of Adrumetum to be discussed in Art. IV., might be explained as a reminiscence of these LXX passages, in view of its association with the many other quotations from the LXX found there.— In the passage in Lucian, Dial. Mort. 233, καθικόμενον ἐν τῇ ῥάβδῳ the ἐν is regarded as doubtful (Winer-Liinemann, p. 364).
117, 118] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 121
introduce a term better suited to Egyptian conditions: it was, of course, an embalming in Egypt. But the profes- sional designation of the person! entrusted with this work was ἐνταφιαστής, Pap. Par. 7” (99 B.c.). Those sections of the Old Testament the scene of which was laid in Egypt, or which had regard to Egyptian conditions, naturally gave the translators most occasion to use Egyptianised expressions.
΄ » VA ἐντυγχάνω, EvTEVELS, EVTUX IA,
In the New Testament writings ἔντευξις is used only in 1 Tim. 21 and 4°, having in both passages the sense of petitionary prayer. This usage is commonly explained?* by the employment of the word in the sense of petition which is found in extra-biblical literature from the time of Diodorus and Josephus. The Papyri* show that in Egypt it had been long familiar in technical language: “‘ ἔντευξις est ipsa petitio sew voce significata, seu in scripto libello expressa, quam supplex subditus offert; . . . vocem Alexandrini potissimum usur- pant ad designandas petitiones vel Regi, vel wis, qui regis nomune rempublicam moderantur, exhibitas’’.» This explanation has been fully confirmed by the newly-discovered Papyri of the Ptolemaic period.6 The technical meaning also occurs in Ep. Arist. (ed. M. Schmidt), p. 58s; A. Peyron, who has previously drawn attention to this passage, finds it also in 2 Macc. 4*—probably without justification.
ἐντυχία 15 found in the same sense in Pap. Lond. xliv.* ἴ (161 B.c.) and 3 Macc. 6 ““—in both passages in the idiomatic phrase ἐντυχίαν ποιεῖσθαι.
The verb ἐντυγχάνω ὃ has the corresponding technical
1 Cf. on this point Lumbroso, Recherches, p. 136 f.
2 Notices, xviii. 2, p. 172. 3 Clavis?, p. 151.
4The word does not occur in the LXX. In 2nd Macc. 48, ἔντευξις ‘signifies conference.
PPALPE CYLON. Ὁ. 101:
5 Cf. the indexes of Leemans, of the Notices, xviii. 2, of Mahaffy and Kenyon.
7 Kenyon, p. 34.
8 In addition to Wisdom 8 31], a later testimony, Pap. Berol. 7351 (BU. Vili., p. 244, No. 24613) 2-3 cent. a.p.: εἰδότες ὅτι νυκτὸς Kal ἡμέρας ἐντυγχάνω τῷ θεῷ ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν, is significant in regard to the use of this word in religious speech (Rom. 827-4, 112, Heb. 7%, Clem. Rom. 1 Cor. 561).
122 BIBLE STUDIES. [118, 119
meaning; the correlative term for the king’s giving an answer 15. χρηματίζειν."
Both the verb and the substantive are frequently com- bined with κατά and ὑπέρ, according to whether the memorial expresses itself against or for some one; cf. the Pauline ὑπερεντυγχάνω, Rom. 8.5,
ἐργοδιώκτης.
This word, common in the LXX, but hitherto not authenticated elsewhere, is vouched for by Pap. Flind. Petr. li. iv. 1.2 (255-254 B.c.) as a technical term for overseer of. work, foreman. Philo, who uses it later, de Vit. Mos. 1. 7 (M., Ῥ. 86), can hardly have found it in the LXX first of all, but rather-in the current vocabulary of his time. It is in use centuries later in Alexandria: Origen® jestingly calls his friend Ambrosius his ἐργοδιώκτης. Even he would not origin- ally get the expression from the LXX.*
εὐΐλατος.
Occurring only in LXX Ps. 98 [99] (representing Niv2) and 1 [3] Esd. 8° = very favourable: already exempli- fied in Pap. Flind. Petr. τι. xiii. 19° (ca. 255 B.c.); observe that it is the same phrase τυχεῖν τινος εὐϊλάτου which is found here and in the passage in Hsd. See a further example, III. 11. 6, swh βιάζομαι, below.
εὐχαριστέω.
In regard to the passive,’ 2 Cor. 11, Pap. Flind. Petr. 11. 1. 48 (260-259 B.c.) is instructive ; it is difficult, however, to
1 A. Peyron, i., p. 102; Lumbroso, Recherches, Ὁ. 254; Mahaffy, ii., p. 28.
2 Mahafty, ii. [6], cf. p. 6.
3 Hieron. de vir. inl. 61; cf. P. D. Huetii, Origenianorwm, i. 8 (Lomm. xxli., p. 38 f.).
4 Upon the usage of the word in ecclesiastical Greek and Latin, cf. the
Greek and Latin Glossaries of Du Cange. The ἅπαξ λεγόμενον ἐργοπαρέκτης of Clem. Rom. 1 Cor. 34! seems to be allied.
> Cod. A reads fAdrov (thus the tAacrov of the second hand should per- haps be restored).
5 Mahaftfy, ii. [45]. The word refers to the king.
7 Cf. Clavis®, p. 184, in the concluding note, and G. Heinrici, Meyer vi.” (1890), p. 25.
5. Mahafty, ii. [4].
119, 120] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 123
settle what the εὐχαριστηθείς in this passage refers to, owing to mutilation of the leaf.
TO θεμέλιον.
In deciding the question whether θεμέλιον is to be construed as masculine or neuter in passages where the gender of the word is not clearly determined, attention is. usually called to the fact that the neuter form is first found in Pausanius (2nd cent. 4.D.). But it occurs previously in Pap. Flind. Petr. ii. xiv. 3! (Ptolemaic period). Cf. also τὸ θεμέλιον of an unknown translator of Lev. 41.8.2 From this, the possibility, at least, of taking it as neuter, in the non- decisive passages *® Sir.1%, Rom. 15”, Eph. 2”, Luke 6%", 14”, 1 Tim. 6”, Heb. 61, may be inferred.
ἴδιος.
The LXX not seldom (Gen. 4718, Deut. 15. Job 2", a) Prov, ὁ 1599 5 027 sadam 1) translate the possessive pronoun (as a suffix) by ἴδιος, though the con- nection does not require the giving of such an emphasis. to the particular possessive relation. Such passages as Job 94 Prov. 915, 227, 27%, might be considered stranger still,. where the translator adds ἴδιος, though the Hebrew text does not indicate a possessive relation at all, nor the context re- quire the emphasising of any. This special prominence is, however, only apparent, and the translation (or addition) is correct. We have here probably the earliest examples of the late-Greek use of ἴδιος for the genitives ἑαυτοῦ and ἑαυτῶν employed as possessives, a usage which can be pointed to in Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Philo, Josephus and Plutarch,*
1 Mahafty, ii. [4], p. 30. 2 Field, i., p. 174. 3 Winer-Schmiedel notes the ‘‘ unambiguous” ones, ὃ 8, 13 (p. 85).
4 References in Guil. Schmidt, De Flavii Iosephi elocutione, Fleck. Jbb. Suppl. xx. (1894), p. 369. Specially important are the many examples given there from Josephus, in whose writings a similar use of οἰκεῖος is also shown. —A more out-of-the-way example of this worn-out οἰκεῖος may be mentioned here. In the second (spurious) Prologue to Jesus Sirach, near the middle, it is said: (τὴν βίβλον) Sipax οὗτος μετ᾽ αὐτὸν πάλιν λαβὼν τῷ οἰκείῳ παιδὶ κατέλιπεν Ἰησοῦ (Libri apocr. V. T. ed. Ο. F. Fritzsche, p. 388). Ο. F. Fritzsche assigns this Prologue to the 4th-5th cent. a.p., HApAT. v. (1859), p. 7; in his edition of 1871, ad loc., he seems to agree with K. A. Credner, who dates it cent. 9-10.
124 BIBLE STUDIES. [121
and in the Attic Inscriptions! subsequent to 69 B.c. This usage is also confirmed by the Apocryphal books of the O. T., specially by those in Greek from the first, and it in- fluences the New Testament writers,? and especially Paul, much more strongly than is implied by Winer-Liinemann.® Exegetes have, in many places, laid a stress upon the ἔδιος which, in the text, does not belong to it at all. In con- sideration of the very widely-extended use of the exhausted ἴδιος in the post-classical age, it will, in point of fact, be the most proper course in exegesis always to assume it primarily as most probable, and to take ἴδιος in the old sense only when the context absolutely requires it. A specially instruc- tive example is 1 Cor. 77, διὰ δὲ τὰς πορνείας ἕκαστος τὴν ἑαυτοῦ γυναῖκα ἐχέτω καὶ ἑκάστη τὸν ἴδιον ἄνδρα ἐχέτω : ἴδιος is here used only for the sake of variety and is exactly equivalent to the ἑαυτοῦ.
ἱλαστήριος and ἱλαστήριον.
Of all the errors to be found in exegetical and lexical literature, that of imagining that ἱλαστήριον in the LXX is identical in meaning with MAD, cover (of the ark of the cove- nant), and that therefore the word with them means pro- pitiatory cover (luther: Gnadenstuhl), 1s one of the most popular, most pregnant with results, and most baneful. Its source lies in the fact that the LXX’s frequent external verbal equation, viz., ἱλαστήριον = kapporeth, has been in- considerately taken as an equation of ideas. But the in- vestigation cannot proceed upon the assumption of this
1K. Meisterhans, Grammatik der attischen Inschriften?, Berlin, 1888, p. 194.
2 Genuine examples are readily found in all of these except Revelation, in which ἴδιος does not occur at all. The reason of this is not, of course, that they all wrote ‘‘ New Testament” Greek, but that they wrote at a time when the force of ié:os had been long exhausted. The Latin translations, in their frequent use of the simple swws (A. Buttmann, p. 102, note), mani- fest a true understanding of the case.
*§ 22,7 (p. 145 f.). Here we read: ‘‘no example can be adduced from the Greeks ’’; reference is made only to the Byzantine use of οἰκεῖος and the late-Latin propriws=swus or ejus. A. Buttmann, p. 102 f., expresses himself more accurately.
199] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 125.
identification of ideas. We must rather, as in all cases where the Greek expression is not congruent with the Hebrew original, begin here by establishing the difference, and then proceed with an attempt to explain it. In the present case our position is happily such that we can give the explanation with some certainty, and that the wider philologico-historical conditions can be ascertained quite as clearly.
To begin with, it is altogether inaccurate to assert that the LXX translate kapporeth by ἱλαστήριον. They first en- countered the word in Exod. 251°"): and thou shalt make a kapporeth of pure gold. The Greek translator rendered thus : Kal ποιήσεις ἱλαστήριον ἐπίθεμα! χρυσίου καθαροῦ. His rendering of kapporeth is therefore not ἱλαστήριον, but ἵλασ- τήριον ἐπίθεμα; he understood kapporeth quite well, and translates 1t properly by cover,? but he has elucidated the: word, used technically in this place, by a theological adjunct which is not incorrect in substance.* ἐπίθεμα is doubtless a translation of kappodreth the word ; ἱλαστήριον ἐπίθεμα is a rendering of kapporeth the religious concept. How then are we to understand this theological gloss upon the Hebrew word? ἱλαστήριον is not a substantive,* but, as in 4 Macc.
1 ἐπίθεμα is wanting in Cod. 58 only; in Codd. 19, 30, etc., it stands before ἱλαστήριον. A second hand makes a note to ἱλαστήριον in the margin of Cod. vii. (an Ambrosianus of cent. 5,—Field, i., p. 5), v2z., σκέπασμα (cover- img), (Field, i., p. 124). Cremer’, p. 447 (=%, p. 475), following Tromm, quotes also LXX Exod. 37° for kapporeth = ἱλαστήριον ἐπίθεμα. But the Complutensian alone has it there—not the manuscripts.
2 The Concordance of Hatch and Redpath is therefore inaccurate in affirming, swb ἐπίθεμα, that this word has no corresponding Hebrew in Exod. 2516(17), and also in quoting this passage swb ἱλαστήριον instead of swb ἱλαστήριος.
3 This is also the opinion of Philo, cf. p. 128 below.
4 Against Cremer’, p. 447 (=, p. 475), who has no hesitation in identifying ἱλαστήριον with kapporeth. His taking ἱλαστήριον as a substantive - in this passage would have better support if the word stood after ἐπίθεμα ; it could then be construed as in apposition to ἐπίθεμα. The passage he quotes, LXX Exod. 80 35 [not 35] is not to the purpose, for, at the end of the verse, ἔλαιον χρῖσμα ἅγιον ἔσται should be translated the (previously mentioned) οὐ shall be a χρῖσμα ἅγιον, and, at the beginning of the verse, χρῖσμα ἅγιον appears to be in apposition to ἔλαιον. If Cremer takes ἱλαστήριον as a substantive = propitiatory cover, then he could only translate LXX Exod. 28 16 [11] by and thou shalt make a propitiatory cover as a cover of pure gold, which the original does not say.
126 IBIBLE STUDIES.| ᾿ [128
17” (if tod ἱλαστηρίου θανάτου is to be read here with the Alexandrinus), an adjective, and signifies of use for propitiation. «~The same theological gloss upon the ceremonial kap- poreth is observed when, in the Greek translation of the Pentateuch'!—first in the passages immediately following upon Exod. 2516"! and also later—it is rendered, brevilo- quently,? by the simple ἱλαστήριον instead of ἱλαστήριον ἐπίθεμα. The word is now a substantive and signifies some- thing lke propitiatory article. It does not mean cover, nor even propitiatory cover, but for the concept cover it substi- tutes another, which only expresses the ceremonial pur- pose of the article. The kapporeth was for the translators a σύμβολον τῆς ἵλεω τοῦ θεοῦ δυνάμεως, as Philo, de vit. Mos. i. 8 (M., p. 150), speaking from the same theological stand- point, explains it, and therefore they named this symbol ἱλαστήριον. Any other sacred article having some connection with propitiation might in the very same way be brought under the general conception ἱλαστήριον, and have the latter substituted for it, 1.6., if what was required was not a translation but a theological paraphrase. And thus it is of the greatest possible significance that the LXX actually do make a generalising gloss* upon another quite different religious conception by ἱλαστήριον, viz., ΓΤ), the ledge of the altar, Ezek. 43141" 2; it also, according to ver. 2’, had to be sprinkled with the blood of the sin-offering, and was therefore a kind of propitiatory article—hence the theologising rendering of the Greek translators. ἱλαστήριον here also
1 The apparent equation ἱλαστήριον = kapporeth is found only in Exod., Lev., Numb.
2 The present writer cannot understand how Cremer,’, p. 447 (= ὃ, p. 475), inverting the facts of the case, can maintain that ἱλαστήριον ἐπίθεμα is an expansion of the simple ἱλαστήριον = kapporeth. This is exactly the same as if one should explain the expression symbolum apostolicum as an ‘‘ expansion ”’ of the simple apostolicum, which we do in fact use for Apostolic Symbol. But, besides, it would be very strange if the LXX had expanded an expression before they had used it at all! No one can dispute that ἱλαστήριον ἐπίθεμα is their earliest rendering of kapporeth. Then it must also be conceded that the simple ἱλαστήριον is an abbreviation. We have in this a case similar to that of the breviloquence Jobel and of ἄφεσις (cf. p. 100 above.)
3 This fact is almost always overlooked in the commentaries.
194] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 127
means neither ledge nor ledge of propitiation, but propitiatory article,
The proof of the fact that the LXX did not identify the concept ἱλαστήριον with kapporeth and ‘azdrah can be supple- mented by the following observed facts. The two words paraphrased by ἱλαστήριον have other renderings as well. In Exod. 26* the original runs, and thow shalt put the kap- poreth wpon the ark of the testimony in the most holy place ; LXX καὶ κατακαλύψεις TO καταπετάσματι THY κιβωτὸν τοῦ μαρτυρίου ἐν τῷ ἁγίῳ τῶν ἁγίων. According to Cremer, the LXX have not translated the Hebrew word here at all —let alone by καταπέτασμα. But it is without doubt a more correct conjecture that they read not ΓΞ but ND, curtain, and thus did translate the Hebrew word.' This conjecture is, however, in no way absolutely necessary ; the author thinks it not at all impossible that the LXX read kapporeth, and translated it by καταπέτασμα, just as they did, at its first occurrence, by ἐπίθεμα. More significant is 1 Chron. 28", where house of the kapporeth 1s rendered by ὁ οἶκος τοῦ ἐξιλασμοῦ: this also is a theological gloss, not a verbal translation of the original. It may be regarded as specially significant that the ceremonial word should thus be glossed in two different ways. Similarly, ‘azdrah in Ezek. 4519 is paraphrased? by τὸ ἱερόν, and, in 2 Chron. 4° and 6", translated by αὐλή.
It thus seems clear to the author that it is not correct to take the LXX’s equation of words as being an equation of ideas. ἱλαστήριον, for the translators, signified propitia- tory article, even where they used it for kapporeth. Philo still had a clear conception of the state of the matter. It
1TIn the same way they probably read in Amos 9! nn) instead of FADS, capital of a column, and translated ἱλαστήριον, unless the θυσιαστήριον of Cod. A and others (Field, ii., p. 979) should be the original ; cf. the same variant to ἱλαστήριον in Exod. 38° [37 5] (in Field, i., p. 152) and Lev. 1614,
? Hardly any one would maintain in regard to this that ἐξιλασμός in the LXX “means” kapporeth.
* Had the Greek translators understood the construction here, they ought certainly to have written καὶ ἐπὶ ras τέσσαρας γωνίας τοῦ ἱεροῦ τοῦ θυσιαστηρίου.
128 BIBLE STUDIES. [125:
is not correct to assert! that, following the example of the LXX, he describes kapporeth as ἱλαστήριον: he describes it correctly as ἐπίθεμα τῆς κιβωτοῦ, and remarks further that it is called ἱλαστήριον in the Bible: De Vit. Mos. i. 8 (M. p. 150) ἡ δὲ κιβωτὸς. .., ἧς ἐπίθεμα ὡσανεὶ πῶμα TO λεγόμενον ἐν ἱεραῖς βίβλοις ἱλαστήριον, and, further on in the same work, τὸ δὲ ἐπίθεμα τὸ προσαγορευόμενον ἱλαστήριον ; De Profug. 19 (Μ. p. 561)... τὸ ἐπίθεμα τῆς κιβωτοῦ, καλεῖ δὲ αὐτὸ ἱλαστήριον. Philo manifestly perceived that the ἱλαστήριον of the Greek Bible was an altogether peculiar designation, and therefore expressly distinguishes it as such: he puts the word, so to speak, in quotation-marks. Thus also, in De Cherub. 8 (M. p. 149), καὶ yap ἀντιπρόσωπά φασιν εἶναι νεύοντα πρὸς TO ἱλαστήριον ἑτέροις 15 Clearly an allusion to LXX Exod. 25 2315 and, instead of saying that Philo here describes the kapporeth as ἱλαστήριον, we should rather say that he, following the LXX, asserts that the cherubim over- shadow the ἱλαστήριον." How little one is entitled to speak of a ‘‘ Sprachgebrauch ”’? (usage, or, habit of speech), viz., (Nac- τήριον = kapporeth, is shown by the fact that Symmachus in Gen. 6'°"°! twice renders the Ark of Noah by ἱλαστήριον," and that Josephus, Antt. xvi. 71, speaks of a monument of white stone as a ἱλαστήριον : περίφοβος δ᾽ αὐτὸς ἐξήει Kal τοῦ
1 Cremer’, p. 447 ( = 8, p. 475).
2Tt is to be doubted whether the Hebrew concept kapporeth was present to the mind of the writer at all: in any case it is wrong to assume forthwith that he consciously described kapporeth as ἱχαστήριον. It is exactly the same as if one were to assert that wherever the word Gnadenstuhl (mercy-seat) occurs in the biblical quotations of German devotional books, the original being kapporeth, the writers describe the kapporeth as Gnaden- stwhl. In most cases the writers will be simply dependent upon Luther, and their usage of the word Gnadenstuhl furnishes nothing towards deciding the question how they understood kapporeth. Cf. p. 134 f.—Similarly, Heb. 9° is an allusion to LXX Exod. 2520[21]; what was said about the passage in Philo holds good here.
3 Cremer’, Ὁ. 447 ( = 8, p. 475).
4 Field, i., p. 23f. The present writer agrees with Field in this matter, and believes that Symmachus desired by this rendering to describe the Ark
as a means of propitiation : God was gracious to such as took refuge in the Ark.
196] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 129
δέους ἱλαστήριον μνῆμα λευκῆς πέτρας ἐπὶ τῷ στομίῳ KaTEC- κευώσατω, Which must certainly be translated: he set up a monument of white stone as a ἱλαστήριον."
What, then, is the meaning of ἱλαστήριον in the impor- tant ‘‘ Christological”’ statement Rom. 3”? Paul says there of Jesus Christ, ὃν προέθετο ὁ θεὸς ἱλαστήριον διὰ πίστεως ἐν τῷ αὐτοῦ αἵματι εἰς ἔνδειξιν τῆς δικαιοσύνης αὐτοῦ. It has been said that the Roman readers could hardly have known the expression from any other source than the Greek Bible.? But, even if this assumption were correct, it still requires to be proved that they could have learned from the Greek Bible that ἱλαστήριον means the kapporeth ; besides, the primary question must be: what did the term signify to Paul him- self? The author believes that even the context requires us to reject the opinion that the Apostle is describing the crucified Christ as ‘‘a’’® kapporeth. Had the Cross been so named, then the metaphor might possibly be understood ; as used of a person, it is infelicitous and unintelligible; further, Christ, the end of the law, Christ, of whom Paul has just said that He is the revealer of the δικαιοσύνη θεοῦ χωρὶς νόμου, would hardly be named by the same Paul, in the same breath, as the cover of the ark of testimony: the metaphor were as unlike Paul as possible. But the whole assumption of the explanation in question is without support: no ‘‘ Sprachge- brauch,’’ according to which one had to understand (Aa- στήριον as the kapporeth, ever existed either in the LXX or later. Hence this explanation of the passage in Romans has long encountered opposition. Again, it is a popular interpretation to take ἱλαστήριον as equivalent to propitiatory
1 Cremer 8, Ὁ. 474, joins ἱλαστήριον with μνῆμα and therefore construes ἱλαστήριον adjectivally—as did the present writer in the German edition of this book, pp. 122 and 127—which is not impossible, but improbable. See note 2 on p. 127 of the German edition.
2 Cremer’, p. 448 ( = 8, p. 475).
> The absence of the article is more important than Cremer supposes ; if “the” kapporeth, “the” ἱλαστήριον, was something so well known to the readers as Cremer asserts, then it would be exactly a case where the article could stand with the predicate (contra E. Kuhl, Die Heilsbedeutung des Todes Christi, Berlin, 1890, p. 25 f.).
9
130 BIBLE STUDIES. [126, 127
sacrifice, after the analogy of σωτήριον, χαριστήριον, καθάρσιον, etc., In connection with which θῦμα is to be supplied. How- ever difficult it would be to find examples of the word being used in this sense,! there is no objection to it linguistically. But it is opposed by the context; it can hardly be said of a sacrifice that God προέθετο 10. The more general explanation therefore, which of late has been advocated again, specially by B. Weiss,” viz., means of propitiation, is to be preferred : linguistically it is the most obvious; it is also presupposed in the “‘usage”’ of the LXX, and admirably suits the connec- tion—particularly in the more special sense of propitiatory gift which is to be referred to just below.
Hitherto the word in this sense had been noted only in Dion Chrysostom (1-2 cent. A.D.), Or. xi. p. 355 (Reiske), καταλείψειν yap αὐτοὺς ἀνάθημα κάλλιστον Kal μέγιστον TH ᾿Α4θηνά καὶ ἐπιγράψειν ἱλαστήριον ᾿Αχαιοὶ τῇ ᾿[Ιλιάδι---ἀπα in later authors. The word here means a votive gift, which was brought to the deities in order to induce them to be favourable*—a propitiatory gift. ven one such example would be sufficient to confirm the view of the passage in Romans advocated above. Its evidential value is not de- creased, but rather increased, by the fact that it is taken from a ‘‘late” author. It would surely be a mechanical notion of statistical facts to demand that only such con- cepts in ‘‘ profane” literature as can be authenticated before, e.g., the time of Paul, should be available for the explana- tion of the Pauline Epistles. For this would be to uphold the fantastic idea that the first occwrrence of a word in the slender remains of the ancient literature must be identical with the earliest use of it in the history of the Greek language, and to overlook the fact that the annoying caprice of statistics may, in most cases, rather tend to delude the pedants who entertain such an idea.
In the case before us, however, a means has been found
1 Winer-Schmiedel, § 16, 2b, note 16 (p. 134) refers only to the Byzantine Theophanes Continuatus. 2 Meyer, iv. ὃ (1891), p. 164 f. and elsewhere.
3 This ἱλαστήριον Should not be described as a sacrifice.
198] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 131
of removing the objection to the ““ lateness ” of the quotation : ἱλαστήριον in the assigned meaning is found also before the time of Paul—occurring as it does in a place at which the Apostle certainly touched in his travels (Acts 211): the Inscription of Cos No. 81 1 reads thus :—
ὁ δᾶμος ὑπὲρ τᾶς αὐτοκράτορος
Καίσαρος Θεοῦ υἱοῦ Σ Σεβαστοῦ σωτηρίας Θεοῖς ἱλαστήριον.
This Inscription is found on a statue or on the base of a statue,*>—at all events on a votive-gift which the ‘‘ people”’ of Cos erected to the gods as a ἱλαστήριον for the welfare of the ‘son of God,” Augustus. That is exactly the same use of the word as we find later in Dion Chrysostom, and the similarity of the respective formule is evident.
The word is used in the same way in the Inscription of Cos No. 347,4 which the author cannot date exactly, but which certainly falls within the imperial period: it occurs upon the fragment of a pillar :—
[ὁ δᾶμος ὁ ᾿Αλεντίων] 5 alert Σε]βα- σ[τ]ῷ Διὶ Σ᾿ τ]ρατίῳ ihac- τήριον δαμαρχεῦν- τος Γαΐου Νωρ- βανοῦ Μοσχίω- νο[ς φι]λοκαίσα- pos.
Thus much, then, can be derived from these three pas- sages, as also from Josephus, viz., that, early in the imperial period, it was a not uncommon custom to dedicate propitia- tory gifts to the Gods, which were called (AXacrTypia, The
1. R. Paton and E. L. Hicks, The Inscriptions of Cos, Oxford, 1891, p. 126.
2 For this expression see below, swb υἱὸς θεοῦ.
3 The editors, p. 109, number it among the Inscriptions on votive- offerings and statues.
4 Paton and Hicks, p. 225 f.
182 BIBLE STUDIES. [129
author considers it quite impossible that Paul should not have known the word in this sense: if he had not already become familiar with it by living in Cilicia, he had certainly read it here and there in his wanderings through the empire, when he stood before the monuments of paganism and pensively contemplated what the piety of a dying civilisa- tion had to offer to its known or unknown Gods. Similarly, the Christians of the capital, whether one sees in them, as the misleading distinction goes, Jewish Christians or Heathen Christians, would know what a ἱλαστήριον was in their time. To suppose that, in consequence of their ‘‘magnificent knowledge of the Old Testament,”’! they would immediately think of the kapporeth, 1s to overlook two facts. First, that the out-of-the-way? passages referring to the ἱλαστήριον may very well have remained unknown even to a Christian who was conversant with the LXX: how many Bible readers of to-day, nay, how many theologians of to-day—who, at least, should be Bible readers,—if their readings have been unforced, and not desecrated by side- glances towards ‘‘ Ritschlianism’’ or towards possible ex- amination questions, are acquainted with the kapporeth ? The second fact overlooked is, that such Christians of the imperial period as were conversant with those passages, naturally understood the ἱλαστήριον in the sense familiar to them, not in the alleged sense of propitiatory cover—just as a Bible reader of to-day, unspoiled by theology, finding the word Gnadenstuhl (mercy-seat) in Luther, would certainly never think of a cover.
That the verb προέθετο admirably suits the ἱλαστήριον taken as propitiatory gift, in the sense given to it in the Greek usage of the imperial period, requires no proof. God has publicly set forth the crucified Christ in His blood in view of
1 Cremer’, p. 448 ( = ὃ, p. 476).
2 By the time of Paul the ceremony in which the kapporeth played a part had long disappeared along with the Ark of the Covenant ; we can but conjecture that some mysterious knowledge of it had found a refuge in theological erudition. In practical religion, certainly, the matter had no longer any place at all.
130] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 133
the Cosmos—to the Jews a stumbling block, to the Gentiles foolishness, to Faith a ἱλαστήριον. The crucified Christ is the votive-gift of the Divine Love for the salvation of men. Elsewhere it is human hands which dedicate to the Deity a dead image of stone in order to gain His favour; here the God of grace Himself erects the consoling image,—for the skill and power of men are not sufficient. In the thought that God Himself has erected the ἱλαστήριον, lies the same wonderful μωρία of apostolic piety which has so inimitably diffused the unction of artless genius over other religious ideas of Paul. God’s favour must be obtained—He Himself fulfils the preliminary conditions; Men can do nothing at all, they cannot so much as believe—God does all in Christ : that is the religion of Paul, and our passage in Romans is but another expression of this same mystery of salvation.
A. Ritschl,' one of the most energetic upholders of the theory that the ἑλαστήριοι: of the passage in Romans signifies the kapporeth, has, in his investigation of this question, laid down the following canon of method: “. . . for ἱλαστήριον the meaning propitiatory sacrifice is authenticated in heathen usage, as being a gift by which the anger of the gods is appeased, and they themselves induced to be gracious. . . . But .. . the heathen meaning of the disputed word should be tried as a means of explaining the statement in question only when the biblical meaning has proved to be wholly inapplicable to the passage.’ It would hardly be possible to find the sacred conception of a ‘biblical’? Greek more plainly upheld by an opponent of the theory of inspiration than is the case in these sentences. What has been already said will show the error, as the author thinks it, of the actual assertions they contain concerning the meaning of ἱλαστήριον in ‘biblical’? and in “heathen” usage; his own reflections about method are contained in the introduc- tion to these investigations. But the case under considera-
1 Die christliche Lehre von der Rechtfertigung und Verséhnung dargesteilt, ii. *, Bonn, 1889, p. 171.
5 Cf. A. Ritschl, p. 168; the opinions advanced there have urgent need of correction.
134 BIBLE STUDIES. (131, 132
tion, on account of its importance, may be tested once more by an analogy which has already been indicated above.
In the hymn O Kénig, dessen Majestit, by Valentin Ernst Loscher (+ 1749), there occurs the following couplet " :—
Mein Abba, schaue Jesum an, Den Gnadenthron der Siinder.?
Whoever undertakes to explain this couplet has, with- out doubt, a task similar to that of the exegete of Rom. 3%, Just as in the passage from Paul there is applied to Christ a word which occurs in the Bible of Paul, so there is in this hymn a word, similarly used, which stands in the Bible of its author. The Apostle calls Christ a ἱλαστήριον ; ἱλαστήριον is occasionally found in the Greek Bible, where the Hebrew has kapporeth : ergo—Paul describes Christ as the kapporeth ! The Saxon Poet calls Christ the Throne of Grace (Gnadenthron) ; the Mercy-seat (Gnadenstuhl—not indeed Throne of Grace, but an expression equivalent to it) is found in the German Bible, where the Greek has ἱλαστήριον, the Hebrew kapporeth : ergo—the poet describes Christ as λα- στήριον, aS kapporeth, i.e., aS the lid of the Ark of the Covenant ! These would be parallel inferences—according to that me- chanical method of exegesis. The historical way of looking at the matter, however, gives us the following picture. Kap- poreth in the Hebrew Bible signifies the cover (of the Ark) ; the Greek translators have given a theological paraphrase of this conception, just as they have occasionally done in other similar cases, in so far as they named the sacred article ἱλαστήριον ἐπίθεμα, propitiatory cover, according to the pur- pose of it, and then, quite generally, ἱλαστήριον, propitiatory article; the readers of the Greek Bible understood this ἱλαστήριον in its OWN proper sense (a sense presupposed also in the LXX) as propitiatory article—the more so as it was otherwise known to them in this sense; the German translator, by reason of his knowledge of the Hebrew text,
1The quotation is from [C. J. Béttcher] Liederlust fiir Zionspilger, 2nd edition, Leipzig, 1869, p. 283.
2 Te., literally: My father, look upon Jesus, the sinner’s throne of grace! 717.
132, 133] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 135
again specialised the propitiatory article into a vehicle or instru- ment of propitiation—again imparting to it, however, a theo- logical shading,—in so far as he wrote, not propitiatory cover or cover of mercy, but mercy-seat ;' the readers of the German Bible, of course, apprehend this word in its own proper sense, and when we read it in Bible or hymn-book, or hear it in preaching, we figure to ourselves some Throne in Heaven, to which we draw near that we may receive mercy and may find grace to keep usin time of need, and nobody thinks of anything else.
The LXX and Luther have supplied the place of the original kapporeth by words which imply a deflection of the idea. The links—kapporeth, ἱλαστήριον, Gnadenstuhl—cannot be connected by the sign of equality, not even, indeed, by a straight line, but at best by a curve.
ἱστός.
The Greek usage of this word is also found in the LXX’s correct renderings of the corresponding Hebrew words, viz., mast (of a ship), Is. 30", 33%, Ezek. 275, and web (through the connecting-link weaver’s-beam), Is. 59° § (likewise Is. 38, but without any corresponding word in our text); cf. Tobit 2" Cod. &. In reference to this, the author would again call attention to a little-known emenda- tion in the text of the Epistle of Aristeas proposed by Lumbroso.? M. Schmidt writes, p. 69 16, (ἔπεμψε δὲ καὶ τῷ PEN EBGO OO hc sss weno ) βυσσίνων ὀθονίων εἰς + τοὺς ἑκατόν, which is altogether meaningless. We must of course read, in accordance with Joseph. Antt. xii. 214 (βυσσίνης ὀθόνης ἱστοὺς ἑκατόν), βυσσίνων ὀθονίων ἱστοὺς ἑκατόν.
καρπόω, ete.
In Leviticus 21! we find the command: ye shall not burn incense (ἼΔΟΙ) of any leaven or honey as an offering made by fire (WW) to Jahweh. The LXX translate: πᾶσαν
1 Luther undoubtedly took this nuance from Heb. 41°, where the θρόνος
᾿ τῆς χάριτος is spoken of: this also he translates by Gnadenstuhl. 2 Recherches, p. 109, note 7.
136 BIBLE STUDIES. (133, 134
γὰρ ζύμην καὶ πᾶν μέλι οὐ προσοίσετε ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ (a mechanical imitation of Ἴ3)3)2) καρπῶσαι κυρίῳ. This looks lke an in- adequate rendering of the original: in the equation, προσφέρειν καρπῶσαι = burn incense as an offering made with fire, there seems to be retained only the idea of sacrifice ; the special nuance of the commandment seems to be lost, and to be supplanted by a different one: for καρποῦν of course means “to make or offer as fruit”. The idea of the Seventy, that that which was leavened, or honey, might be named a /rwit- offering, is certainly more striking than the fact that the offering made by fire is here supplanted by the offering of fruit. But the vagary cannot have been peculiar to these venerable ancients, for we meet with the same strange
notion also in passages which are not reckoned as their
work in the narrower sense. According to 1 [3] Esd. 4” King Darius permits to the returning Jews, among other things, καὶ ἐπὶ τὸ θυσιαστήριον ὁλοκαυτώματα καρποῦσθαι καθ᾽ ἡμέραν, and, in the Song of the Three Children 12, Azarias laments καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν TO καιρῷ τούτῳ ἄρχων καὶ προφήτης καὶ ἡγούμενος οὐδὲ ὁλοκαύτωσις οὐδὲ θυσία οὐδὲ προσφορὰ οὐδὲ θυμίαμα οὐδὲ τόπος τοῦ καρπῶσαι ἐναντίον σου καὶ εὑρεῖν ἔλεος. Τί then a whole burnt-offering could be spoken of as ἃ fruit- offering, wherefore should the same not be done as regards things leavened and honey ?
But the LXX can be vindicated in a more honourable way. Even their own usage of καρπόω elsewhere might give the hint: it is elsewhere found? only in Deut. 26, οὐκ ἐκάρπωσα ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν εἰς ἀκάθαρτον, Which 1s meant to repre- sent I have put away nothing thereof (i.e., of the tithes), being unclean. In this the LXX take $722 to mean for an unclean use, a8 did also De Wette, while καρπόω for VY is apparently intended to signify put away, ἃ meaning of the word which is found nowhere else,*? implying, as it does, almost the
10. F. Fritzsche HApAT. i. (1851), p. 32, in reference to this passage. Thus also the Greek lexica,
* In Josh. 5! we should most probably read ἐκαρπίσαντο. * Schleusner explains καρπόω = aufero by καρπόω = decerpo, but it is only the middle voice which occurs in this sense.
134, 135] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 137
opposite of the primary meaning to bring forth fruit. It is not the LXX, however, who have taken καρπόω and put away as equivalent, but rather the unscientific procedure which looks upon verbal equations between translation and original without further ceremony as equations of ideas. The true intention of the Greek translators is shown by a comparison of Lev. 2% and Deut. 26". In the first passage, one may doubt as to whether καρπόω is meant to represent 7I or TW, but whichever of the two be decided upon does not matter: in either case it represents some idea like to offer a sacrifice made with fire. In the other passage, καρπόω certainly stands for Va, and if, indeed, the Greek word cannot mean put away, yet the Hebrew one can mean to burn. It is quite plam that the LXX thought that they found this familiar meaning in this passage also: the two passages, in fact, support one another, and ward off any suspicion of ‘‘ the LXX’s”’ having used καρπόω in the sense of put away and bring forth frwit at the same time. However strange the result may appear, the issue of our critical com- parison is this: the LXX used xapzow for to burn both in a ceremonial and in a non-ceremonial sense.
This strange usage, however, has received a brilliant confirmation. P. Stengel has shown, from four Inscriptions and from the old lexicographers,’” that «ap7row must have been quite commonly used for to burn in the ceremonial sense.*
Stengel explains as follows how this meaning arose: καρποῦν properly signifies to cut into pieces; the holocausts of the Greeks were cut into pieces, and thus, in ceremonial language, capvow must have come to mean abswmere, consu- mere, ὁλοκαυτεῖν.
1Zu den griechischen Sacralalterthiimern, Hermes, xxvii. (1892), pp. 161 ff.
2 The passages he brings forward, in which the meaning, at least, of to sacrifice for καρπόω is implied, may be extended by the translation sacrificiwm ofjero given by the Itala, as also by the note “καρπῶσαι, θυσιάσαι᾽᾽ in the MS. glossary (?) cited by Schleusner. Schleusner also gives references to the ecclesiastical literature.
3 He counts also Deut. 261} among the LXX passages in this connec- tion, but it is the non-ceremonial sense of fo burn which καρπόω has there.
198 BIBLE STUDIES. [135, 136
The ceremonial sense of καρπόω grows more distinct when we notice the compound form ὁλοκαρπόω,, Sir. 45%, 4 Macc. 18 4, Sibyll. Orac. 3 565, as also by the identity in meaning of the substantives ὁλοκάρπωμα = ὁλοκαύτωμα, and ὁλοκάρπωσις = ὁλοκαύτωσις, all of which can be fully established in the LXX and the Apocrypha as meaning, in most cases, burnt-offering, just like κάρπωμα = κάρπωσις.
These substantives are all to be derived, not from καρπὸς fruit, but from the ceremonial καρπόω, to burn.
κατά.
1. In 8 Macc. 5* and Rom. 12 is found ὁ καθ᾽ εἷς ὃ for εἷς ἕκαστος, and in Mark 149 and John 8°‘ the formula εἷς καθ᾽ εἷς for unusquisque. In these constructions, unknown in classical Greek, we must, it is said, either treat εἷς as an indeclinable numeral, or treat the preposition as an adverb.° Only in the Byzantine writers have such constructions been authenticated. But εἷς καθ᾽ ἕκαστος ὃ already stands in LXX Lev. 25" (καὶ ἀπελεύσεται εἷς ἕκαστος εἰς τὴν κτῆσιν αὐτοῦ), according to Cod. A. This represents U8, and cannot, therefore, be explained as a mechanical imitation of the original. What we have here (assuming that A has pre- served the original reading) will rather be the first example of a special usage of κατά, and thus, since it is ἕκαστος which is now in question, the first, at least, of Buttmann’s proposed explanations would fall to the ground.
It is, of course, quite possible that the εἷς καθ᾽ ἕκαστος should be assigned only to the late writer of Cod. A. But
1 This of course does not “properly” signify to offer a sacrifice which consists wholly of fruits (Grimm, HApAT. iv. [1857], p. 366), but to burn com- pletely.
2 Stengel, p. 161.
3 For the orthography cf. Winer-Schmiedel, § 5, 7 g (p. 36).
4 In the non-Johannine passage about the adulteress.
> A, Buttmann, p. 26 f., Winer-Liinemann, ὃ 37, 3 (p. 234).
ὁ The Concordance of Hatch and Redpath puts, very strangely, a point of interrogation to καθ᾽. Holmes and Parsons (Oxf. 1798) read “" καί wncis imelus.” for καθ΄. But the fac-simile (ed. H. H. Baber, London, 1816) shows KAT quite distinctly.
136, 137] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 139
the hypothesis of its being the original derives, as the author thinks, further support from the following facts. The LXX translate the absolute Ws by ἕκαστος in innumerable pas- sages. But in not a Single passage except the present (ac- cording to the ordinary text), is it rendered by εἷς ἕκαστος. This combination, already found in Thucydides,' frequent also in the ‘“‘ fourth’’ Book of Maccabees,? in Paul and in Luke, is used nowhere else in the LXX, a fact which, in consideration of the great frequency of ἕκαστος = WN, is cer- tainly worthy of note. It is in harmony with this that, so far as the author has seen, no example occurs in the con- temporary Papyri.? The phrase seems to be absent from the Alexandrian dialect in the Ptolemaic period. Hence it is ὦ priori probable that any other reading which is given by a trustworthy source should have the preference. Although indeed our εἷς καθ᾽ ἕκαστος seems strange and unique, yet this fact speaks not against, but in favour of, its being the original. It can hardly be imagined that the copyist would have formed the harsh εἷς καθ᾽ ἕκαστος out of the every-day εἷς ἕκαστος. But it is quite plain, on the other hand, that the latter reading could arise from the former—nay, even had to be made from it by a fairly ‘‘ educated ’’ copyist.° Our reading is further confirmed not only by the analogies cited, but also by Rev. 217, ava εἷς ἕκαστος τῶ" πυλώνων ἣν ἐξ ἑνὸς μαργαρίτου : here also we have evidently an adverbial use of a preposition,’ which should hardly be explained as one of the Hebraisms of Revelation, since in 4° the distri-
1 A.Buttmann, p. 105.
2In O. F. Fritzsche, Libri apocryphi V. T. graece, 4%, 52, 8° 8, 18 15 (in which the connected verb stands in the plural), 18 17, 141°, 15° (καθ᾽ eva ἕκαστον —according to AB, which codices should not be confused with the similarly designated biblical MSS. ; cf. Praefatio, Ὁ. xxi.), 1515, 16%.
° The author cannot of course assume the responsibility of guarantee- ing this.
+ Nor does it occur in the Epistle to the Hebrews. If we could assign 4 Macc. to an Alexandrian writer, we should have the first example of it in that book.
°\Hence also the frequent corrections in Mark 141° and John 8°.
δ Cf. also 2 [Hebr.] Ezra 67° ἕως εἷς πάντες, which indeed is perhaps a Hebraism, and 1 Chron. 5", Cod. A [N.B.] ἕως πάντες (Field, i., p. 708).
140 BIBLE STUDIES. (137, 138
butive ava is made, quite correctly, to govern the accusative, and since, further, it would be difficult to say what the original really was which, as it is thought, is thus imitated in Hebraising fashion.
2. “Even more diffuse and more or less Hebraising peri- phrases of simple prepositions are effected by means of the substantives πρόσωπον, yelp, στόμα, ὀφθαλμός. 1 The author considers that this general assertion fails to stand the test. One of the phrases used by Buttmann as an example, viz., κατὰ πρόσωπόν τινος = κατά, 18 already found in Pap. Flind. Petr. 1. xxi.,? the will of a Libyan, of the year 237 B.C., in which the text of line 8 can hardly be restored other- wise than τὰ pe[v κα]τὰ πρόσωπον τοῦ ἱεροῦ.
λειτουργέω, λειτουργία, NELTOUPYLKOS.
“The LXX took over the word [λειτουργέω] in order to designate the duties of the Priests and Levites in the sanctuary, for which its usage in profane Greek yielded no direct support, as it is only in late and in very isolated cases [according to p. 562, in Dionysius of Halicarnassus and Plu- tarch| that even one word of this family, Nectoupyos, occurs as applied to priests.”* The Papyri show, however, that λευτουργέω and λειτουργία were commonly used in Egypt in the ceremonial sense. In particular, the services in the Serapeum‘* were so designated. As examples of the verb there should be noted here: Pap. Par. 23° (165 B.c.), 27° (same date), Pap. Lugd. B* (164 B.c.), E® (same date), Pap. Lond, xxxii.? (161 B.¢.), xi (161 B:c.)) Pap. Par 290" Gee 160 8.6.) ; of the substantive, Pap. Lugd. B™ (164 B.c.), Pap.
lA. Buttmann, p. 274. 2 Mahaffy, i. [59].
3 Cremer’, p. 560 (=, p. 592). But before this there had been noted in the Thesaurus Graecae Linguae, Diod. Sic. i. 21, τὸ τρίτον μέρος τῆς χώρας αὐτοῖς δοῦναι πρὸς Tas τῶν θεῶν θεραπείας τε καὶ λειτουργίας“.
1 Cf. upon this H. Weingarten, Der Ursprung des Ménchtwms, ZKG. i. (1877), p. 30 ff., and R-H?, x. (1882), p. 780 fi.
5 Notices, xviii. 2, p. 268. WO Moyle, Ὁ: ΠΗ.
7 Leemans, i., p. 9. 8 Ibid., p. 30.
9 Kenyon, p. 19. 10. Tbrd., Ὁ. 38.
11 Notices, xvili. 2, p. 279. 12 Teemans, i., p. 11.
138, 139] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 141
Lond. xxii.’ (164-163 B.c.), xli.? (161 B.c.), Pap. Dresd. 11.3 (162 B.C.), Pap. Par. 334 (ca. 160 B.c.). But also of other cere- monial services elsewhere there were used Nevtoupyéw, Pap. Par. 5° (113 B.c.) twice ; λειτουργία in the Papp. Lugd. G 5, H‘ and 9,8 written 99 8.0.9
λειτουργικός is found not ‘‘only in biblical and ecclesiastical Greek,’ ! but occurs in a non-religious sense six times in a taxation-roll of the Ptolemaic Period, Pap. Flind. Petr. 11. xxxix. e.' Its use is confined, so far as “biblical” hterature is concerned, to the following Alex- andrian compositions : LXX Exod. 81 19, 89 1,123 Numb. 412 26, We 2 Chron:-24 τ: Heb; 11
ip.
In the three passages, 2 Chron. 392 30. 334, and Dan. 8°, the L.XX render the direction West by Xt. Elsewhere they use λίψ' quite accurately for South. But even in the pas- sages cited they have not been guilty of any negligence, but have availed themselves of a special Egyptian usage, which might have been noticed long ago in one of the earliest- known Papyrus documents. In a Papyrus of date 104 B.c.,
1 Kenyon, p. 7. 2 Thid., p. 28.
3 Wessely, Die griechischen Papyri Sachsens, Berichte iiber die Verhand- lungen der Kgl. Sachs. Gesellsch. der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig, philol.-histor. Classe, xxxvii. (1885), p. 281.
4 Notices, xviii. 2, p. 289. > Notices, xviii. 2, pp. 137 and 143.
5 Leemans, i., p. 43. 7 Tbid., p. 49. 8 Tbtd.; p. 52.
® A Berlin Papyrus of date 134 B.c. (Ph. Buttmann, AAB. 1824, hist.- phil. Klasse, p. 92) uses λειτουργία for the duties of the funeral society men- tioned below under Aoyela. Similarly in Pap. Lond. iii., 146 or 135 B.c. (Kenyon, pp. 46, 47). But it is doubtful whether such duties were of a cere- monial character.—Further examples of λειτουργεῖν in the religious sense, from the Inscriptions, in H. Anz, Subsidia ad cognoscendum Graecorum ser- monem vulgarem e Pentateuchi versione Alexandrina repetita, Dissertationes Philologicae Halenses, vol. xii., Halle, 1894, p. 346.
i Cremer ἢ: 6. (ΞΞ 5, p: 595).
U Mahaffy, ii. [180].
15 Tromm and Cremer also give Exod. 39%; probably they intend 39 [19], where the word is found only in Cod. 72 and the Complutensian : in regard to the confused state of the text, cf. Field, i., p. 160.


142 BIBLE STUDIES. [139, 140
which was elucidated by Boeckh,! there occurs the phrase λιβὸς οἰκία Tédutos. As the South (νότος) has been expressly mentioned just before, this can mean only in the West the house of Tephis. To this Boeckh? observes: ‘Ai means South- West in Hellas, Africus, because Libya lies South-West from the Hellenes—whence its name: Libya lies directly West from the Egyptians ; hence Ai is for them the West itself, as we learn here’’. The word had been already used in the will of a Libyan, Pap. Flind. Petr. i. χχι. (237 B.c.), where similarly the connection yields the meaning West. λογεία.
In 1 Cor. 16! Paul calls the collection for ‘‘ the saints ” (according to the ordinary text) λογία, and in ver.” says that the λογίαι must begin at once. The word is supposed to occur for the first time here,‘ and to occur elsewhere only in the Fathers. Grimm’ derives it from λέγω. Both views are wrong.
λογεία can be demonstrated to have been used in Egypt from the 2nd cent. B.c. at the latest: it is found in Papyrus documents belonging to the Χοαχύται or Χολχύται (the orthography and etymology of the word are uncertain), a society which had to perform a part of the ceremonies re- quired in the embalming of bodies: they are named in one place ἀδελφοὶ of τὰς λειτουργίας ἐν ταῖς νεκρίαις παρεχόμενοι." They had the right, as members of the guild, to institute collections, and they could sell this right. Such a collection is called Xoyeta: Pap. Lond. 111." (ca. 140 B.c.), Pap. Par. ὃ ὃ
1 Erklérung einer Agyptischen Urkunde in Griechischer Cursivschrift vom Jahre 104 vor der Christlichen Zeitrechnung, A AB. 1820-21 (Berlin, 1822), hist.-phil. Klasse, p. 4.
212), S10) 3 Mahaffy, i. [59]; cf. [60].
4Th. Ch. Edwards, 4 Commentary on the First Epistle to the Corim- thians, London, 1885, p. 462, even maintains that Paul coined the word.
5 Clavis*®, p. 263. ᾿
6 Pap. Taur. 1., 2nd cent. B.c. (A. Peyron, i., p. 24). For the name
brother, cf. p. 87 £. above ; vexpia A. Peyron, i., p. 77, takes to be res mortuaria. For these guilds in general, ¢f., most recently, Kenyon, p. 44 f.
7 Kenyon, p. 46. 8 Notices, xviii. 2, pp. 143, 147.

140, 141] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE, 143
(114 B.c.) twice; Pap. Lugd. Μ1 (114 B.c.). We find the word, further, in the taxation-roll Pap. Flind. Petr. ii. xxxix. c,? of the Ptolemaic period,’ in which it is used six times—pro- bably in the sense of taza.
The derivation of the word from éyw is impossible ; λογεία belongs to the class‘ of substantives in -e¢a formed from verbs in -evw. Now the verb Xoyevw to collect, which has not been noticed in literary compositions, is found in the following Papyri and Inscriptions : Pap. Lond. xxiv.° (163 B.c.), i1.° (ca. 140 B.c.), a Papyrus of date 134 B.c.,’ Pap. Taur. 8 8 (end of 2nd cent. B.c.), an Egyptian Inscription, C/G. iii., No. 495637 (49 a.D.); ef. also the Papyrus-fragment which proves the presence of Jews in the Fayyim.?
The Papyri yield also the pair παραλογεύω, Pap. Flind. Petr. 11. xxxvili. ὁ 10 (242 B.c.) and παραλογεία, Pap. Par. 611 (145 B.c.).
In regard to the orthography of the word, it is to be observed that the spelling Xoyeta corresponds to the laws of word-formation. Its consistent employment in the relatively well-written pre-Christian Papyri urges us to assume that it would also be used by Paul: the Vaticanus still has it, in 1 Cor. 16?” at least.
In speaking of the collection for ™ the poor in Jerusalem,
1 Leemans, i., p. 60. 2 Mahaffy, ii. [127].
* This Papyrus, it is true, is not dated, but is ‘a fine specimen of Ptole- maic writing” (Mahaftfy, ibid.), and other taxation-rolls which are published in xxxix. date from the time of Ptolemy II. Philadelphus, i.e., the middle of the 3rd cent. B.c. For further particulars see below, III. iii. 2.
4 Winer-Schmiedel, ὃ 16, 2a (p. 134).
> Kenyon, p. 32. 5 Τργᾶ., Ὁ. 41-
7 Ph. Buttmann, 44B., 1824, hist.-phil. ΚΊ., p. 92, and, on this, p. 99. 8 A. Peyron, ii., p. 45. 9 Issued by Mahaffy, i., p. 43, undated. 0 Mahaffy, ii. [122]. Ul Notices, xviii. 2, Ὁ: 351.
The author has subsequently seen that L. Dindorf, in the Thesawrus Graecae Linguae, v. (1842-1846), col. 348, had already noted Aoyeia in the London Papyrus (as in the older issue by J. Forshall, 1839). He certainly treats λογία and Aoyela in separate articles, but identifies the two words and decides for the form λογεία.
15. For the eis following Aoyela cf. p. 117 ἔ. above.
144 BIBLE STUDIES. [141, 142
Paul has other synonyms besides λογεία, among them λει- toupyia, 2 Cor. 9" This more general term is similarly associated with Aoyela in Pap. Lond. 11]. 9.'
In 1 Cor. 16! Donnaeus and H. Grotius proposed to alter ““ λογία ᾿᾿ to εὐλογία,2 as the collection is named in 2 Cor. 9°. This is of course unnecessary: but it does not seem to the author to be quite impossible that, conversely, the first εὐλογίαν in the latter passage should be altered to λογείαν. If λογείαν were the original, the sentence would be much more forcible; the temptation to substitute the known word for the strange one could come as easily to a copyist as to the scholars of a later period.
μειζότερος. With this double comparative in 3 John*? cf. the double superlative μεγιστότατος, Pap. Lond. cxxx.* (1st or 9nd cent. A.D.).
ὁ μικρός.
In Mark 15* there is mentioned a ᾿Ιάκωβος ὁ μικρός. It is a question whether the attribute refers to his age or his stature,® and the deciding between these alternatives is not without importance for the identification of this James and of Mary his mother. In reference to this the author would call attention to the following passages. In Pap. Lugd. N® (103 B.c.) a Νεχούτης μικρός is named twice. Upon this Leemans" observes: ‘‘ quominus vocem μικρός de corporis altitudine intelligamus prohibent twm upse verborum ordo quo ante patris nomen et lic et infra in Trapezitae subscriptione vs. 4 poni- tur ; tum quae sequitur vox μέσος, qua statwrae certe non parvae fuisse Nechyten docemur. Itaque ad aetatem referendum videtur, et additum fortasse ut distingueretur ab altero Nechyte, fratre
1 Kenyon, p. 46. Also in line 17 of the same Papyrus, λειτουργιων should doubtless be read instead of λειτουργων. Cf. also line42 and Pap. Par. 5 (Notices, xviii. 2, top of p. 143).
2 Wetstein, ad loc. 5. Winer-Schmiedel,
4 Kenyon, p. 134. 5 B. Weiss, Meyer i.
ὁ Leemans, i., p. 69. 7 Thid., p. 74.
§ 11, 4 (p. 97). ΟἹ
(1885), p. 281.

142, 143] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 145
majore ;”’ it is, in point of fact, shown by Pap. Tawr. 1. that this Nechytes had a brother of the same name. In a simi- lar manner a Mavpns μέγας 15 named in Pap. Flind. Petr. 11. xxv. i! (Ptolemaic period). Mahaffy,? it is true, prefers to interpret the attribute here as applying to the stature.
The LXX also are acquainted with (not to speak of the idiom ἀπὸ μικροῦ ἕως μεγάλου) a usage of μικρός to signify age, e.g., 2 Chron. 22.
νομός.
L. van Ess’s edition of the LXX (1887)? still reads Is. 19? thus: καὶ ἐπεγερθήσονται Αὐγύπτιοι ἐπ᾿ Αἰγυπτίους Kai πολεμήσει ἄνθρωπος τὸν ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ καὶ ἄνθρωπος τὸν πλησίον αὐτοῦ, πόλις ἐπὶ πόλιν καὶ νόμος ἐπὶ νόμον. In the original the concluding words of the verse are kingdom against kingdom. The Concordance of Tromm therefore says νόμος lex stands for ΓΞ ΟΣ regnum, and the editor of Van Ess’s LXX appears to be of the same opinion. The correct view has long been known;* the phrase should be accented thus: νομὸς ἐπὶ voor.’ νομός 15 a terminus technicus for a political department of the country, and was used as such in Egypt especially, as was already known from Hero- dotus and Strabo. The Papyri throw fresh hight upon this division into departments, though indeed the great majority of these Papyri come from the ‘‘ Archives” of the Nomos of Arsinoe. This small matter is noted here because the trans- lation of Is. 19, the “ὅρασις Αὐγύπτου,᾽᾽ has, as a whole, been furnished by the LXX, for reasons easily perceived, with very many instances of specifically Egyptian—in com- parison with the original, we might indeed say modern- Egyptian—local-colouring. This may also be observed in other passages of the O.T. which refer to Egyptian con- ditions.
1 Mahaffy, ii. [79]. 1 JO) 92. 5. It is true that the edition is stereotyped, but the plates were corrected at certain places before each reprint. 4 Cf. Schleusner, Nov. Thes. s. v. 5 Thus also Tischendorf® (1880), and Swete (1894). 10
146 BIBLE STUDIES. (143, 144
ὄνομα.
In connection with the characteristic ‘‘ biblical’ con- struction εἰς τὸ ὄνομά τινος," and, indeed, with the general usage of ὄνομα in the LXX, etc., the expression évtevEis εἰς TO Tov βασιλέως ὄνομα, which occurs several times in the Papyri, deserves very great attention: Pap. Flind. Petr. 11. li, 1? (260-259 B.c.), Pap. Flind. Petr. τ xx. ee* (241 B.C.) ; cf., possibly, Pap. Flind. Petr. u. xlvii.* (191 B.c.).
Mahaffy® speaks of the phrase as a hitherto unknown “formula”. Its repeated occurrence in indictments cer- tainly suggests the conjecture that it must have had a tech- nical meaning. This is, doubtless, true οἱ. ἔντευξις. 5 An ἔντευξις εἰς TO TOU βασιλέως ὄνομα would be a direct petition —a memorial to the King’s Majesty ;7 the name of the King is the essence of what he is as ruler. We see how nearly this idea of the ὄνομα approaches to that of the Old Testa- ment DW, and how convenient it was for the Egyptian trans- lators to be able to render quite literally the expressive word of the sacred text.
The special colouring which ὄνομα often has in early Christian writings was doubtless strongly influenced by the LXX, but the latter did not borrow that colouring first from the Hebrew ; it was rather a portion of what they took from the adulatory official vocabulary of their environment. But current usage in Asia Minor also provided a connecting link for the solemn formula of the early Christians, viz., εἰς τὸ ὄνομα with genitive of God, of Christ, etc., after it. In the Inscription of Mylasa in Caria, Waddington, 11. 2, No. 416
CIG. τ. No. 2693 e, belonging to the beginning of the im- perial period,® we find γενομένης δὲ THs ὠνῆς τῶν προγεγραμ-
1 Passages in Cremer’, p. 676 f. ( = 8, p. 710). 2 Mahaffy, ii. [2].
3 Tord. [59]. 4 Tbid. [154]. 5 Tbid. [32]. δ Cf. above, p. 121 f.
7The synonymous phrase ἔντευξιν ἀποδιδόναι (or ἐπιδιδόναι) TG βασιλεῖ occurs frequently in the Papyri of the 2nd cent. B.c. (Kenyon, pp. 9, 41 and 10, 11; 17, 28).
8 It is undated, but an approximate point is afforded by its affinity with a long series of similar decrees from Mylasa (Waddington, iii. 2, Nos. 403-
415), of which No. 409 must have been written not long after 76 B.c. The date given above seems to the author to be too late rather than too early.

144, 145] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 147
μένων τοῖς κτηματώναις εἰς TO τοῦ θεοῦ ὄνομα. This means: “after the sale of the afore-mentioned objects had been concluded with the κτηματῶναι εἰς τὸ τοῦ θεοῦ [Zeus] ὄνομα ᾿᾿΄. In refer- ence to the κτηματώνης, which is to be found in Inscriptions only, Waddington? observes that the word means the pur- chaser of an article, but the person in question, in this con- nection, is only the nominal purchaser, who represents the real purchaser, 1.6., the Deity; the κτηματώνης εἰς τὸ τοῦ θεοῦ ὄνομω is the fidéicommissaire du domaine sacré. The pas- sage appears to the author to be the more important in that it presupposes exactly the same conception of the word ὄνομα as we find in the solemn forms of expression used in religion. Just as, in the Inscription, to buy into the name of God means to buy so that the article bought belongs to God, so also the idea underlying, eg., the expressions to baptise into the name of the Lord, or to believe into the name of the Sen of God, is that baptism or faith constitutes the belonging to God or to the Son of God.
The author would therefore take exception to the state- ment that the non-occurrence of the expression ποιεῖν Tu ἐν ὀνόματί τινος in profane Greek is due to the absence of this usage of the Name. What we have to deal with here is most likely but a matter of chance; since the use of ὄνομα has been established for the impressive language of the court and of worship, it is quite possible that the phrase ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι τοῦ βασιλέως or Tov θεοῦ may also come to hght some day in Egypt or Asia Minor.
The present example throws much hght upon the de- velopment of the meaning of the religious terms of primitive Christianity. It shows us that, when we find, eg., a Christian of Asia Minor employing peculiar expressions, which occur also in his Bible, we must be very strictly on
1 The very same formula is found in the Inscription C/G. ii. No, 2694 ὃ, which also comes from Mylasa, and in which, as also in CIG. ii. No, 2693 e, Boeckh’s reading τοῖς κτημάτων δὶς εἰς τὸ τοῦ θεοῦ ὄνομα is to be corrected by that of Waddington,
2 In connection with No. 338, p. 104,
Cremer enpseron(¢— spel LA).

148 BIBLE STUDIES. [145, 146
our guard against summarily asserting a ‘‘ dependence ”’ upon the Greek Old Testament, or, in fact, the presence of any Semitic influence whatever.—Further in III. i. 1 below, and Theol. Literaturzeitung, xxv. (1900), p. 735.
ὀψώνιον.
The first occurrence of τὰ ὀψώνια is not in Polybius ; it is previously found in Pap. Flind. Petr. 11. xii. 7? and 17 3 (258-253 B.c.); Ta ὀψώνια is found in Pap. Flind. Petr. ii. xxxiil. a* (Ptolemaic period). In all three places, not pay of soldiers, but quite generally wages; similarly Pap. Lond. xlv.° (160-159 B.c.), xv.® (131-130 B.c.), Pap. Par. 627 (Ptolemaic period). The word is to be found in Inscriptions onwards from 278 B.c.8. Further remarks below, III. i. 6.
παράδεισος.
This word resembles ἀγγαρεύω in its having been di- vested of its original technical meaning, and in its having become current in a more general sense. It stands for garden in general already in Pap. Flind. Petr. 11. xlvi. ὁ (200 B.c.), cf. xxii.” xxx. c, xxxix. 7” (all of the Ptolemaie period); 15. similarly in the Inscription of Pergamus, Wad- dington, iii. 2, No. 1720 6 (undated). It is frequent in the LXX, always for garden (in three of the passages, viz., Neh. 2% Kecles. 2°, Cant. 41%, as representing D778"); soin Sir., Sus., Josephus, etc., frequently. Of course, παράδεισος in LXX Gen. 255 is also garden, not Paradise. The first witness to this new technical meaning" is, doubtless, Paul, 2 Cor. 124, then Luke 23 “ and Rev. 27; 4 Esd. 7, 8.
1 Clavis*, p. 328. 2 Mahafty, ii. [38]. 3 Ibid. [42]. 4 Tbid., [119]; 5 Kenyon, p. 36. 6 Thid., pp. 55, 56. 7 Notices, xviil. 2, p. 357.
8 Hxamples in Guil. Schmidt, De Flav. 108. eloc. Fleck. Jbb, Suppl. xx. (1894), pp. 511, 531. ᾿
9 Mahafty, ii. [160]. 10 Tbid. [68]. 1 Tbid. [104]. 12 Tbid. [184].
13 Cf, also Pap. Lond. cxxxi., 78-79 a.D. (Kenyon, p. 172).
44The Mishna still uses D"}7§ only for park in the natural sense (Schiirer, ii., p. 464, -- 3, ii, p. 553) [Eng. Trans., ii., ii., p. 188 £., note 881.
16 Cf. G. Heinrici, Das zweite Sendschreiben des Apostel Paulus an die Korinthier erklart, Berlin, 1887, p. 494.
147] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 149
παρεπίδημος.
In LXX Gen. 234 and Ps. 38 [39] 15, this is the trans- lation of AWA ; used, most probably in consequence thereof, in 1 Pet. 11, 2", Heb. 11%; authenticated only + in Polybius and Athenaeus. But it had been already used in the will of a certain Aphrodisios of Heraklea, Pap. Flind. Petr. 1. xix.” (225 B.c.), who calls himself, with other designations, a παρεπίδημος. Mahatfy*® remarks upon this: ‘in the de- scription of the testator we find another new class, παρεπί- δημος, & Sojourner, so that even such persons had a right to bequeath their property”. Of still greater interest is the passage of a will of date 238-237 B.c.* which gives the name of a Jewish παρεπίδημος in the Fayyim:* ᾿Απολλώνιον [παρεπΊδημον ὃς καὶ συριστὶ ᾿Ιωνάθας ὃ [καλείϊται].
The verb παρεπιδημέω, ¢.g., Pap. Flind. Petr. 11. xi. 197 (258-253 B.c.).
/ παστοφόριον.
The LXX use this word in almost all the relatively numerous passages where it occurs, the Apocrypha and Josephus® in every case, for the chambers of the Temple. Sturz® had assigned it to the Egyptian dialect. His con- jecture is confirmed by the Papyri. In the numerous docu- ments relating to the Serapeum at Memphis, παστοφύριον is used, in a technical sense, of the Serapeum itself, or of cells in the Serapeum:"™ Pap. Par. 11” (157 B.c.), 401 (156 B.C.) ; similarly in the contemporary documents Pap. Par.
1 Clavis*, Ὁ. 339. 2 Mahaffy, i. [84].
9. [90]: 4 Toid., ii., p. 23.
> Upon Jews in the Fayytim cf. Mahafty, i., p. 43 f., ii. [14]. ὁ »ἈΑπολλώνιος is a sort of translation of the name Ἰωνάθας.
7 Mahaffy, ii. [45]. The word is frequently to be found in Inscriptions ; references, e.g., in Letronne, Recueil, i., p. 340; Dittenberger, Sylloge Nos. 24630 and 2675.
8 Particulars in Guil. Schmidt, De Flav. Ios. eloc., Fleck. Jobb. Suppl. xx. (1894), p. 511 f. Reference there also to C/G. ii., No. 2297.
9 De dialecto Macedonica et Alexandrina, p. 110 f. 10 Cf. p. 140 above. 11 Cf, Lumbroso, Recherches, p. 266 ἔν 12 Notices, xviii. 2, p. 207. 16 [bid., p. 305.
150 BIBLE STUDIES. [148, 149
411 and 37*—in the last passage used of the ᾿Ασταρτιεῖον which is described as being contained ἐν τῷ μεγάλῳ Yaap- πιείῳ3ἢ The LXX have thus very happily rendered the general term naw, wherever it denotes a chamber of the Temple, by a technical name with which they were familiar.
παστοφόριον is also retained by several Codices in 1 Chron. 9%, and 2 Hsd. [Hebr. Ezra] 8”.4
περιδέξιον.
In ΠΧ Numb. 91. Ὁ Exod. 90. and Js. 9. Gn the two latter passages without any corresponding original) for brace- let. To be found in Pap. Flind. Petr. i. κι (238-237 B.C.). The enumeration given there of articles of finery resembles Exod. 35”, and particularly Is. 37°; in the latter passage the ἐνώτια ὃ (mentioned also in the former) come immediately after the περιδέξια---80 in the Papyrus. As the original has no corresponding word in either of the LXX passages, we may perhaps attribute the addition to the fact that the two ornaments were usually named together.
7, TEPLOTAGLS.
In 2 Macc. 415, Symmachus Ps. 33 [84]°" (here the LXX has θλῆψις, or παροικία), in the evil sense, for distress ; it is not found first of all in Polybius, but already in Pap. Lond. xlu.* (172 B.c.); of. the Inscription of Pergamus No. 245 A® (before 133 B.c.) and the Inscription of Sestos (ca. 120 B.c.), line “6.19
1 Notices, xviii. 2, p. 306. 2 Ibid., Ὁ. 297.
5 Cf. Brunet de Presle, ibid., and Lumbroso, Recherches, Ὁ. 266.
4 Field, i., pp. 712, 767. It is these which De Lagarde uses to deter- mine the Lucianus: his accentuation of 1 Chron. 9%, παστοφοριῶν, is not correct.
> Better reading than in Mahaffy, i. [87]; see Mahafty, ii., p. 22.
6 The Papyrus reads evwidia; that is also the Attic orthography—found in a large number of Inscriptions from 398 B.c. onwards, Meisterhans?, pp. 51, 61.
7 Field, ii., p. 139. 8 Kenyon, p. 30. 9 Frankel, p. 140.
10 W. Jerusalem, Die Inschrift von Sestos und Polybios, Wiener Studien, i. (1879), p. 34; cf. p. 50 f., where the references from Polybius are also given.
149, 150] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 151
περιτέμνω.
The LXX use περιτέμνω always in the technical sense of the ceremonial act of circwmcision ; this technical meaning also underlies the passages in which circwmcision is meta- phorically spoken of, ¢.g., Deut. 10 16 and Jer. 44. The word is never employed by the LXX in any other sense. The usual Hebrew word ‘D933 occurs frequently, it is true, in a non-technical signification, but in such cases the translators always choose another word: Ps. 57 [508] ἀσθενέω for to be cut of,’ Ps. 117 [118], apvvowas for the cutting in preces (Ὁ) of enemies, Ps. 89 [90],° ἀποπίπτω (of grass) for to be cut down.” Even in a passage, Deut. 30°, where “ΥΩ, cir- cumcise, 1s used metaphorically, they reject περιτέμνω and translate by περικαθαρίζω")" The textual history of Ezek. 16* affords a specially good illustration of their severely restrained use of language. To the original (according to our Hebrew text) thy navel-string was not cut, corresponds, in the LXX (according to the current text), οὐκ ἔδησας τοὺς μαστούς σου, ‘ quite an absurd translation, which, however, just because of its absolute meaninglessness, is, without doubt, ancient tradition”’.* But the “translation” is not so absurd after all, if we read ἔδησαν" with the Alexan- drinus and the Marchalianus,® a reading which is supported by the remark of Origen:’ the LXX had translated non alli- gaverunt ubera tua, ““ sensum magis eloquii exponentes quam verbum de verbo exprimentes”. That is to say, among the services mentioned here as requiring to be rendered to the helpless new-born girl, the Greek translators set down some- thing different from the procedure described by the Hebrew author ; what they did set down corresponds in some degree
' The author does not clearly understand the relation of this translation to the (corrupt) original.
? If the original should not be derived from bL,, ; οἵ. Job 14°, where the LXX translate ἐκπίπτω.
5. Cf. Lev. [ποὺ Luc. as in Cremer’, p. 886 (= 8, p. 931)] 19 33. 4 Cornill, Das Buch des Propheten EHzechiel, p. 258.
° Which would be translated they bound.
® For this Codex cf. Cornill, p. 15. 7 Field, ii., p. 803.
152 BIBLE STUDIES. [150, 151
with the ἐν σπαργάνοις σπαργανωθῆναι which comes later.} But perhaps they had a different text before them. In any case the translation given by some Codices,? viz., οὐκ ἐτμήθη ὁ ὀμφαλός σου, is a late correction of the LXX text by our present Hebrew text; other Codices read οὐκ ἔδησαν τοὺς μαστούς cov, and add the emendation οὐκ ἐτμήθη ὁ ὀμφαλός σου; Others do the same, but substitute περιετμηθη, a form utterly at variance with LXX usage (and one against which Jerome’s non ligaverunt mamuillas tuas et wmbilicus twus non est praecisus® still guards), for the ἐτμήθη. It is this late emenda- tion which has occasioned the idea* that the LXX in one case also used τὸν ὀμφαλόν as the object of περιτέμνειν. This is not correct. One may truly speak here, for once, about a “usage” of the LXX: περιτέμνω, with them, has always a ceremonial meaning.°
In comparison with the verbs ΓΤ, ND and ban, which are rendered by περιτέμνω, the Greek word undoubtedly in- troduces an additional nuance to the meaning; not one of the three words contains what the περί implies. The choice of this particular compound is explained by the fact that it was familar to the LXX, being in common use as a technical term for an Egyptian custom similar to the Old Testament circumcision. ‘The Egyptians certainly practised circumcision in the 16th century B.c., probably much earlier.’’®
1 The reading οὐκ ἤδεισαν, which is given in two late minuscules, and from which Cornill makes the emendation οὐκ ἤδεισας (as a 2nd person singular imperfect founded on a false analogy) as being the original reading of the LXX, appears to the author to be a correction of the unintelligible ἔδησαν which was made in the Greek text itself, without reference to the original at ali.
2 Field, ii., p. 803, where a general discussion is given of the materials which follow here.
’ Should have been circwmecisus, if Jerome was presupposing περιετμήθη.
1 Cremer’, p. 886 (= ὃ, p. 931). The remark is evidently traceable to the misleading reference of Tromm.
> Similarly περιτομή, occurring only in Gen. 117 15 and Ex. 4%. In Jer. 11" it has crept in through a misunderstanding of the text; cf. Cremer’, p. 887 (= 8, p. 932).
5 J. Benzinger, Hebrdische Archdologie, Freiburg and Leipzig, 1894, p. 154.

i tt

ee nee ee
151, 152] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 153
Now even if it cannot be made out with certainty that the Israelites copied the practice from the Egyptians, yet it is in the highest degree probable that the Greek Jews are indebted to the Egyptians! for the word. Herodotus already verifies its use in 11. 36 and 104: he reports that the Egyp- tians περιτάμνονται τὰ αἰδοῖα. But the expression is also authenticated by direct Egyptian testimony: Pap. Lond. Xxlv.” (163 B.C.), ὡς ἔθος ἐστὶ τοῖς Αὐγυπτίοις περιτέμνεσθαι, and Pap. Berol. 7820* (14th January, 171 Α.Ὁ., Fayytim) still speaks several times of the περιτμηθῆναι of a boy κατὰ τὸ ἔθος.
Τί περιτέμνω is thus one of the words which were taken over by the LXX, yet the supposition* that their frequent
ἀπερίτμητος uncircumcised = bay was first coimed by the Jews of Alexandria may have some degree of probability. In the last-cited Berlin Papyrus, at least, the as yet uncir- cumcised boy is twice described as ἄσημος. The document appears to be employing fixed expressions. ἄσημος was per- haps the technical term for uncircumcised among the Greek Egyptians ;° the more definite and, at the same time, harsher ἀπερίτμητος corresponded to the contempt with which the Greek Jews thought of the uncircumcised.
πῆχυς.
We need have no doubt at all about the contracted genitive πηχῶν, LXX 1 Kings 7? (Cod. A), * (Cod. A), πε πε ἢ εὶς 40", 412. John 218. Rev. 211} It is already found in Pap. Flind. Petr. ii. χ]1.8 (Ptolemaic
1 The author does not know how the Greek Egyptians came to use the compound with zepi. Did the corresponding Egyptian word suggest it to them? Or did the anatomical process suggest it to them independently ?
2 Kenyon, p. 32, cf. p. 33. 5 BU. xi., p. 337 f., No. 347.
4 Cremer’, p. 887 (= 8, p. 932).
> And circumcision as σημεῖον : cf., in reference to this, LXX Gen. 174 and Rom. 4".
°F. Krebs, Philologus, 1111. (1894), p. 586, interprets ἄσημος differently, viz., free from bodily marks owing to the presence of which circumcision was forborne.
τ Winer-Schmiedel, § 9, 6 (p. 88). 5 Mahaffy, ii. [137].
154 BIBLE STUDIES. [152, 153
period) twice; Josephus agrees with the LXX in using πήχεων and πηχῶν promiscuously.'
ποτισμος.
In Aquila Prov. 3°? watering, irrigation ; to be found in Pap. Flind. Petr. 1. 1x. 4% (240 B.c.).
πράκτωρ.
In LXX Is. 3” for WR) despot. In the Papyni fre- quently as the designation of an official; the mpaxtwp* seems to have been the public accountant :° Pap. Flind. Petr. 11. xiii. 17 ὃ (258-253 B.c.), and several other undated Papyri of the Ptolemaic period given in Mahaffy, 11.’
In Luke 12* also the word has most probably a techni- cal meaning ; but a lower officer of the court.
Symmachus Ps. 108 [109]! * uses it for TW creditor.
πρεσβύτερος.
The LXX translate 12} old man by both πρεσβύτης and
πρεσβύτερος. The most natural rendering was πρεσβύτης,
and the employment of the comparative πρεσβύτερος must have had some special reason. We usually find πρεσβύτερος in places where the translators appear to have taken the ji of the original as implying an official position. That they in such cases speak of the elders and not of the old men is explained by the fact that they found πρεσβύτερος already used technically in Egypt for the holder of a communal office. Thus, in Pap. Lugd. A 8615 (Ptolemaic period), mention
1Guil. Schmidt, De Flav. Ios. eloc., Fleck. Jhb. Suppl. xx. (1894),
p- 498.
2 Field, ii., p. 315. 5 Mahaffy, ii. [24].
4On the πράκτορες in Athens, cf. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Avis- toteles und Athen, i., Berlin, 1893, p. 196.
5 Mahafty, ii. [42]. ὁ τρια.
7 Further details in E. Revillout, Le Papyrus grec 13 de Turin in the
Revue égyptologique, ii. (1881-1882), p. 140 f. 8 Field, ii., p. 265. 9 Leemans, i., p. 3.
it does not however denote a finance-official, ἢ

] ϊ ;
153, 154] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 155:
is made of ὁ πρεσβύτερος τῆς K@uns—without doubt an official designation,—although, indeed, owing to the mutila- tion of another passage in the same Papyrus (lines 17-23), no further particulars as to the nature of this office can be ascertained from 10.} The author thinks that οἱ πρεσβύτεροι in Pap. Flind. Petr. 11. iv. 613? (255-254 B.c.) is also an official designation ; cf. also Pap. Flind. Petr. ii. xxxix. a, gandi4.° Similarly, in the decree of the priests at Diospolis in honour of Callimachus,* (ca. 40 B.c.), the πρεσβύτεροι are still mentioned along with the ἱερεῖς τοῦ μεγίστου θεοῦ ᾿Δμονρασωνθήρ. We have a periphrasis of the title πρεσ- βύτερος in Pap. Taur. 861° (end of the 2nd cent B.c.), in which the attribute τὸ πρεσβεῖον éywv παρὰ τοὺς ἄλλους τοὺς ἐν τῇ κώμῃ κατοικοῦντας iS applied to a certain Erieus. We still find of πρεσβύτεροι in the 2nd century A.D. as Egyptian village-magistrates, of whom a certain council of three men, οἱ τρεῖς, appears to have occupied a special position.®
Here also then the Alexandrian translators have ap- propriated a technical expression which was current in the land.
Hence we must not summarily attribute the “‘ New Testa- ment,” i.c., the early Christian, passages, in which πρεσβύ- Tepo. occurs as an Official designation, to the ‘‘ Septuagint idiom,” since this is in reality an Alexandrian one. In those cases, indeed, where the expression is used to desig- nate Jewish municipal authorities’ and the Sanhedrin,® it is allowable to suppose that it had been adopted by the Greek Jews from the Greek Bible,® and that the Christians
1 Leemans, i., foot of p. 3. 2 Mahaffy, ii. [10]. 3 Tbid. [125].
4 CIG. iii., No. 4717: on this, as on the title πρεσβύτεροι in general, cf. Lumbroso, Recherches, Ὁ. 259.
> A. Peyron, ii., p. 46.
6 U. Wilcken, Observationes ad historiam Aeqypti provinciae Romanae depromptae e papyris Graecis Berolinensibus ineditis, Berlin, 1885, p. 29 f.
7 Schurer, τ 190 ff. (=*i., p. 176 ff.). [Hnug. Trans.,ii., τ p 150 £.] 8 Ibid., p. 144 ff. (= 7ii., p. 189 ff.). [Hng. Trans., ii., i., p. 165 ff.] ® Cf. the use of the word πρεσβύτεροι in the Apocrypha and in Josephus.
156 BIBLE STUDIES. (154, 155
who had to translate the term the old men found it convenient to render it by the familiar expression οἱ πρεσβύτεροι. But that is no reason for deeming this technical term a peculi- arity of the Jewish idiom. Just as the Jewish usage is traceable to Egypt, so is it possible that also the Christian communities of Asia Minor, which named their superinten- dents πρεσβύτεροι, may have borrowed the word from their surroundings, and may not have received it through the medium of Judaism at all.!| The Inscriptions of Asia Minor prove beyond doubt that πρεσβύτεροι was the technical term, in the most diverse localities, for the members of a corpora- tion :? in Chios, CIG. 11. Nos. 2220 and 2221 (1st cent. B.c.*), —in both passages the council of the πρεσβύτεροι is also named τὸ πρεσβυτικόν ; in Cos, CIG. τ. No. 2508 = Paton and Hicks, No. 119 Gmperial period*); in Philadelphia in Lydia, CIG. τ. No. 3417 (imperial period), in which the συνέδριον τῶν πρεσβυτέρων," mentioned here, is previously named γερουσία. ‘‘It can be demonstrated that in some islands and in many towns of Asia Minor there was, besides the Boule, also a Gerousia, which possessed the privileges of a corporation, and, as it appears, usually consisted of Bou- leutes who were delegated to it. Its members were called γέροντες, γερουσιασταὶ, πρεσβύτεροι, yepatot. They had a
1 ΤῊ any case it is not correct to contrast, as does Cremer’, p. 816 (= 8, p. 858), the word ἐπίσκοπος, as the ‘‘ Greek-coloured designation,” with the term πρεσβύτεροι (almost certainly of Jewish colouring). The word was a technical term in Egypt before the Jews began to speak of πρεσβύτεροι, and it is similarly to be found in the Greek usage of the imperial period in the most diverse localities of Asia Minor.
2 This reference to the πρεσβύτεροι of Asia Minor has of course a purely philological purpose. The author does not wish to touch upon the question regarding the nature of the presbyterial ‘‘ Office”. It may have been de- veloped quite apart from the name—whatever the origin of that may have been.
* Both Inscriptions are contemporary with No. 2214, which is to be assigned to the Ist cent. B.c.
+ Possibly, with Paton and Hicks, p. 148, to be assigned, more exactly, to the time of Claudius.
5 Cf. the data of Schiirer, ii., p. 147 f., note 461. [Eng. Trans. ii., i., p- 169, note 461.]

155, 156] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 157
president (ἄρχων, προστάτης, προηγούμενος), a secretary, a special treasury, a special place of assembly (γεροντικὸν, γερουσία), and a palestra.” '—See also ITI. i. 4, below.
πρόθεσις.
The LXX translate the technical expression bread of the countenance (also called row-bread [Schichtbrot] and continual bread), which Luther rendered Schaubrot (show-bread), in 1 Sam. 21° and Neh. 10* by οἱ ἄρτοι τοῦ προσώπου, and in Exod. 25* by of ἄρτοι ot ἐνώπιοι, but their usual rendering iS οἱ ἄρτοι THs προθέσεως.ςἩ The usual explanation of this πρόθεσις is setting forth, i.e., of the bread before God. The author leaves it undecided whether this explanation is cor- rect ; but, in any case, it is to be asked how the LXX came to use this free translation, while they rendered the original verbally in the other three passages. The author thinks it not unlikely that they were influenced by the reminiscence of a ceremonial custom of their time: ‘‘ Aw culte se rat- tachaient des institutions philantropiques telle que la suivante : Le médecin Dioclés cite par Athénée (3, 110), nous apprend qu’il y avait une tpoOnots* de pains périodique a Alexandrie, dans le temple de Saturne (AnreEavdpets τῷ Κρόνῳ ἀφιεροῦντες προτιθέασιν ἐσθίειν τῷ βουλομένῳ ἐν TH TOD Κρόνου tepo). Cette πρόθεσις τῶν ἄρτων se retrowve dans un papyrus du Louvre (60%). ? The expression πρόθεσις ἄρτων is also. found in LXX 2 Chron. 18"; ef. 2 Macc. 10%.
Tuppakys.
Hitherto known only from LXX Gen. 25”, 1 Sam. 16”, 17”, for ruddy. To be found in Pap. Flind. Petr. 1. xvi. 1* (237, B.c.), xxi. (237 B.c.), possibly also.in xiv.° (237 B.c.).
10. Benndorf and G. Niemann, Reisen in Lykien und Karien, Vienna, 1884, p. 72.
2 Lumbroso, Recherches, p. 280; the Papyrus passage—certainly not fully legible—in Notices, xviii. 2, p. 347. LLumbroso defends his reading in Recherches, p. 23, note 1.
3 Mahaffy, i. [47]. 4 Tbid. [59].
5 Tbid. [43]. The passage is mutilated.
158 BIBLE STUDIES. [156, 157
σιτομέτριον.
In Luke 12” for portio frumenti; referred to in this passage only: to be verified by Pap. Flind. Petr. 11. xxxill. a? (Ptolemaic period). Cf. σιτομετρέω in Gen. 47” (said of Joseph in Egypt).
σκευοφύλαξ.
Farliest occurrence in the Recension οἱ Lucianus,’ 1 ‘Sam. 17 ”, as the literal translation of aban WOW keeper of the baggage.2 The supposition that the word was not first applied as a mere momentary creation of the recensionist, but came to him on good authority, is supported by its occurrence in Pap. Flind. Petr. 11. ΧΗ]. το ἡ (258-253 B.C.) : σκεοφυλακα there is to be read σκευοφύλακα, in accordance with σκευοφυλάκιον in Pap. Flind. Petr. 11. v. α ὃ (before 250 B.C.).
Mf / σπυρίς, σφυρίς.
With the σφυρίς (vernacular aspiration *) handed down on good authority in Mark 8°”, Matt. 15°, 16", Acts 9”, of. σφυρίδα in Pap. Flind. Petr. 11. xvii. 2 αἴ (246 B.c.), though we should observe the reading σπυριδίου in Pap. Flind. Petr. Z d® (Ptolemaic period). Further remarks in III. 1. 2, below.
στάσις.
Among other words, the translation of which by στάσις is more or less intelligible, Wy stronghold Nah. 3", and OTN footstool 1 Chron. 28", are rendered in the same way
1 Mahaffy, ii. [113]. In this an οἰκονόμος submits an account of his house- keeping. The present writer thinks that the ovrowerpia which occurs in this account should be taken as the plural of σιτομέτριον, and not as a singular, σιτομετρία. The passage is mutilated.
2 Hdited by De Lagarde, Librorwm V. T. canonicorum pars prior graece, Gottingen, 1883.
3 The simple φύλακος of our LXX text is marked with an asteriscus by Origen, Field, i., p. 516.
4 Mahaffy, ii. [39]. > Tbid. [16]. On σκευοφυλάκιον cf. Suidas.
6 Winer-Schmiedel, § 5, 27 ὁ (p. 60).
7 Mahaffy, ii. [59]. 8 [bid., p. 88.


157, 158] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 159
by the LXX, and Symmachus? uses στάσις in Is. 6" for KAN root-stock (truncus) or young tree, cutting ;* certainly a very remarkable use of the word, and one hardly explained by the extraordinary note which Schleusner® makes to the passage in Nahum: “‘ στάσις est firmitas, consistentia, modus et via subsistendi ac resistendi’’. What is common to the above three words translated by στάσις 15 the idea of secure elevation above the ground, of upright position, and this fact seems to warrant the conjecture that the translators were acquainted with a quite general usage of στάσις for any upright object.*
This conjecture is confirmed by Pap. Flind. Petr. 11. xiv. 3° (Ptolemaic period ?), i.e., if the στώσεις which is found in this certainly very difficult passage be rightly interpreted as erections, buildings.© This use of the word seems to the author to be more certain in an Inscription from Mylasa in Caria, CIG. 1. No. 2694 a (imperial period), in which Boeckh interprets the word στάσεις (so restored by him) as stabula.
συγγενής.
In the Old Testament Apocryphal books there is found not infrequently the expression kinsman of a king. Like friend,’ etc., it is a court-title, which was transferred from the Persian usage to the language of Alexander the Great's court, and thence became very common among the Diadochi. Compare, in regard to Egypt, the exhaustive references in Lumbroso ;* in regard to Pergamus, the Inscription No. 248, line est. (185-184 B.c.).°
1 Field, ii., p. 442.
2JIn the LXX this passage is wanting; Aquila translates στήλωσις ; Theodotion, στήλωμα (Field, ibid.).
3 Novus Thesaurus, ν. (1821), p. 91.
4 Cf. the German Stand for market-stall. [Also the English stand = support, grand-stand, etc.—Tr.]
> Mahaffy, ii. [51]. 6 Thid., p. 30. 7 Of. sub φίλος below.
8 Recherches, Ὁ. 189 f. Also the Inscription of Delos (3rd cent. B.c.), Bull. de corr. hell. iii. (1879), p. 470, comes into consideration for Kgypt: the Χρύσερμος there named is συγγενὴς βασιλέως Πτολεμαίου.
9 Frankel, pp. 166 and 505.
160 BIBLE STUDIES. [158, 159
συνέχω.
Used in Luke 22 of the officers who held Jesus in charge ; in the same sense Pap. Flind. Petr. ii. xx.! (252 B.c.).
σῶμα.
In Rev. 18¥ σώματα stands for slaves. σῶμα was used for person in very early times, and already in classical Greek the slaves were called σώματα οἰκετικά or δοῦλα. σῶμα alone—without any such addition—is not found used for slave earlier than in LXX Gen. 34” (36°) Tob. 10”, Bel and the Dragon”, 2 Macc. 84, Ep. Arist. (ed. M. Schmidt), p. 162, in Polybius and later writers. The Greek translators of the O. T. found the usage in Egypt: the Papyri of the Ptolemaic period yield a large number of examples, cf. especially Pap. Flind. Petr. ii. xxxix.!
ς ΄ ὑποζύγιον.
The LXX translate WWM ass in very many places by ὑποζύγιον (cf. also Theodotion Judg. 51,5 19106 [also the Alexandrinus and the recension of Lucianus read ὑποζυγίων in both passages], Symmachus Gen. 367), Similarly, ὑποζύγιον stands for ass in Matt. 21° (cf. Zech. 9°) and 2 Pet. 2168. This specialising of the original general term draught anmal, beast of burden, is described by Grimm” as a usage peculiar to Holy Scripture, which is explained by the im- portance of the ass as the beast of burden κατ᾽ ἐξοχήν in the Kast. A statistical examination of the word, however, might teach us that what we have to deal with here is no “ biblical ”
1 Mahaffy, ii. [61].
? Ch. A. Lobeck ad Phryn, (Leipzig, 1820), p. 378.
ὅ Cf. the old scholium to the passage, σώματα τοὺς δούλους ἴσως λέγει (Field, 1., p. 52).
4 Mahaffy, ii. [125] ff. > Field, i., p. 412.
ὃ Tbid., p. 464.  Toid., p. 52'£.
δ᾽ Τὴ this passage the interpretation ass is not in any way necessary ; the she-ass of Balaam, which is called ἡ ὄνος in the LXX, might quite well be designated there by the general term beast of burden.
9 Clavis?, p. 447.

159, 161] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 161
peculiarity, but, at most, a special usage of the LXX which may possibly have influenced other writings. But even the LXX do not occupy an isolated position in regard to it; the truth is rather that they avail themselves of an already- current Egyptian idiom. It seems to the author, at least, that the ‘‘ biblical” usage of ὑποζύγιον is already shown in the following passages: Pap. Flind. Petr. 11. xxii! (Ptolemaic period), where βοῦς 2 ἢ ὑποζύγιον ἢ πρόβατον are mentioned after one another; Pap. Flind. Petr. i. xxv. d* (2nd half of 3rd cent. B.c.), where the donkey-driver Horos gives a receipt for money due to him by a certain Charmos in respect of ὑποζύγια : ὁμολογεῖ “Qpos ὀνηλάτης ἔχειν παρὰ Χάρμου δέοντα ὑποζυγίων κατὰ σύμβολον ; similarly in the same Papyrus 7.4
Grimm’s remark may, of course, be turned to account in the explanation of this idiom.
υἱός (τέκνον).
Those circumlocutions by which certain adjectival con- ceptions are represented by vios or τέκνον followed by a genitive, and which are very frequent in the early Christian writings, are traced back by A. Buttmann® to an “ influence of the oriental spirit of language’’; they are explained
‘ by Winer-Liinemann® as ‘ Hebrew-like circumlocution,”
which however is no mere idle circumlocution, but is due to the more vivid imagination of the oriental, who looked upon any very intimate relationship—whether of connection, origin or dependence—as a relation of sonship, even in the spiritual sphere. According to Grimm,’ these periphrases spring ‘‘ ex ingenio linguae hebraeae,’ and Cremer ὃ describes them as ‘‘ Hebrew-like turns of expression in which υἱός... is used analogously to the Hebr. }2”
In order to understand this ‘‘ New Testament ”’ idiom, it is also necessary to distinguish here between the cases in
1 Mahafty, ii. [68]. 2 Tt should be stated that Mahaffy sets a? to Bous.
3 Mahafty, ii. [75]. 4 Tid. [79]. > Gramm. des neutest. Sprachgebrauchs, p. 141. 5 8 34, 30, note 2 (p. 223 f.). 7 Clavis*, p. 441,
5 7th edition, p. 907 = 8, p. 956. ᾿ ᾿ 11
162 BIBLE STUDIES. [161, 162
which this ‘‘ periphrastic ᾿᾿ υἱός or téxvoyv! occurs in trans- lations of Semitic originals, and the instances found in texts which were in Greek from the first. This distinction gives us at once the statistical result that the circumlocution is more frequent in the former class than in the latter. One should not, therefore, uniformly trace the “ New Testament ” passages back to the influence of an un-Greek ‘spirit of language,” but, in the majority of cases, should rather speak merely of a translation from the Semitic. What occasioned the frequent vids or τέκνον was no ‘‘spirit of language ”’ which the translators may have brought to their task, but rather the hermeneutic method into which they were un- consciously drawn by the original.
First as regards vios: such translations occur in the fol- lowing passages,—Mark 2 = Matt. 9° = Luke 5*, οἱ υἱοὶ τοῦ νυμφῶνος, a Saying of Jesus.—Mark 3", υἱοὶ βροντῆς, where the original, Boavepyes or Boavnpyes, is also given, and the equation Boave or Boavn = 3 is certainly evident. —Matt. 8% = 13%, of υἱοὶ τῆς βασιλείας, sayings of Jesus. —Matt. 18 33, of υἱοὶ τοῦ πονηροῦ, a saying of Jesus.—Matt. 23%, υἱὸν γεέννης, a saying of Jesus.—Matt. 21°, υἱὸν ὑποζυγίου, translation” of the Hebrew NINN |B, Zech. 9°.
1 The solemn expression viol or τέκνα θεοῦ has, of course, no connection with this, as it forms the correlative to θεὸς πατήρ.
2 One dare hardly say, with respect to this passage, that ‘‘ Matthew ” ‘* quotes” from the original Hebrew text ; the present writer{conjectures that «‘Matthew,” or whoever wrote this Greek verse, translated its Hebrew original, which, already a quotation, had come to him from Semitic tradition. The Old Testament quotations of ‘“‘ Matthew” agree, in most passages, with the LXX: wherever the Semitic tradition contained words from the Hebrew Bible, the Greek translator just used the Greek Bible in his work, 1.6., of course, only when he succeeded in finding the passages there. The tradition gave him, in Matt. 21°, a free combination of Zech. 99 and Is. 62" as a word of ‘the Prophet”: he could not identify it and so translated it for himself, A similar case is Matt. 13*°; here the tradition gave him, as a word of “ the Prophet Isaiah,” a saying which occurs in Ps. 782, not in Isaiah at all; but as he could not find the passage, ἡρμήνευσε δ᾽ αὐτὰ ὡς ἣν δυνατός. Similarly. in Mark 1?f-, a combination of Mal. 3! and Is. 40% is handed down as a word of ‘‘the Prophet Isaiah’’: only the second half was found in Isaiah and therefore it is quoted from the LXX; the first half, however, which the Greek Christian translator could not find, was translated independently, and,
168] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 163
—Luke 10°, υἱὸς εἰρήνης, a saying of Jesus.—Luke 16° and 20 84, of viol τοῦ αἰῶνος τούτου, sayings of Jesus.—Luke 168, τοὺς υἱοὺς τοῦ φωτός, a saying of Jesus.—Luke 20%, τῆς ἀναστάσεως viol, a saying of Jesus.—Acts 4*°, υἱὸς παρα- κλήσεως, Where the ostensible original, BapvaBas,! is also given.—The υἱὲ διαβόλου, Acts 131°, should also be men- tioned here, as the expression clearly forms a sarcastic antithesis to Βαριησοῦ, son of Jesus (verse 6).
As regards τέκνον, we have the same phenomenon in (Matt. 11 15 =) Luke 7”, τῶν τέκνων αὐτῆς [codias], a saying of Jesus.
Similarly quotations and manifest analogical formations should not be taken into consideration in a critical exami- nation of the original idiom; 6.4., υἱοὶ φωτός in 1 Thess. 5° (here also the analogical formation viol ἡμέρας) and John 12 56 (cf. τέκνα φωτός, Ephes. 5%) should probably be taken as a quotation from Luke 16%, or of the saying of Jesus pre- served there, but in any case as an already familiar phrase ; οἱ viol τῶν προφητῶν, Acts 9 35, is a quotation of a combina- tion which had become familiar from LXX 1 Kings 20*, Kings 2°°*—the following καὶ [υἱοὶ] τῆς διαθήκης is an analogical formation ; ὁ υἱὸς τῆς ἀπωλείας, 2 Thess. 2° and John 17! is an echo of LXX Is. 574 réxva amwnrevas ; Ta τέκνα τοῦ διαβόλου 1 John 3! is perhaps an analogical for- mation from οἱ viol τοῦ πονηροῦ, Matt. 13°.
There remain, then, the combination υἱοὶ τῆς ἀπειθείας (Col. 3°), Eph. 23, 5°, and its antithesis τέκνα ὑπακοῆς, 1 Pet. 14; ta τέκνα τῆς ἐπαγγελίας, Gal. 478, Rom. 9%, and its
in the form in which it occurs in Matt. 11! and Luke 7”, it is taken over as an anonymous biblical saying.—In all these passages we have to do with biblical sayings which do not form part of the discourses of Jesus or of His friends or opponents, and which therefore do not belong to the earliest material of the pre-Synoptic Gospel tradition. But the peculiar character of the quotations just discussed, which the author cannot interpret in any other way, requires us to postulate that a sort of ‘‘synthetic text” (verbin- dender Text), and, in particular, the application of certain definite O. T. words to Christ, had been added, at a very early period, to this primitive Semitic tradition ; here and there in the Gospels we can still see, as above, the method by which they were rendered into Greek. 1 See further p. 307 f. below.
1604 BIBLE STUDIES. ; [164
antitheses κατάρας τέκνα, 2 Pet. 215, τέκνα ὀργῆς, Eph. 2.5. But it is not at all necessary, even for the explanation of these expressions, to go back to the Hebrew spirit or to the oriental genius of language. The system followed by the Alexandrian translators of the Old Testament may furnish us here with an instructive hint. In innumerable cases their task was to render into Greek an exceedingly large number of those characteristic Semitic turns of expression formed with ja. True, they rendered not a few of those cases by the corresponding constructions with vios; but very frequently, too, translating freely (as we might say), they found substitutes for them in Greek expressions of a different character. But such a procedure, in view of the comparative scrupulosity with which in general they follow the original, must surely surprise us, if we are to pre-suppose in them, as in the early Christian writers, a certain Semitic “genius of language” lying in reserve, as 1t were, and behind their ““ feeling” for the Greek tongue. Had they always imitated that characteristic 3. by using vids, then it might have been maintained with some plausibility that they had seized the welcome opportunity of translating literally and, at the same time, of giving scope to the non- Hellenic tendencies of their nature in the matter of language ; as they, however, did not do this, we may be permitted to say that they had no such tendency at all. We give the following cases,! from which this fact may be deduced with certainty : “Son” of Man, Is. 567, Prov. 15" = ἄνθρω- πος ; son of the uncle, Numb. 961} = ἀνεψιός ; son of the she- asses, Lech. 9° = πῶλος νέος : 3 ““ son” of the month, often, = μηνιαῖος ; “son” of the dawn, Is. 141" = πρωὶ ἀνατέλλων ; “son” of strangers, often, = ἀλλογενής OY ἀλλόφυλος ; ““ son” of the people, Gen. 23" = πολίτης ; ““ son”’ of the quiver, Lam. 313 = (oi? φαρέτρας ; “son” of strength, 2 Chron. 28° = duva-
1 These might be added to.
2 The translator of the same combination in Matt. 21° has scrupulously imitated the original by his vids ὑποζυγίου.
3 Thus the unanimous tradition of all the Codices except 239 and the Syro-Hexaplar (Field, ii., p. 754) which read viol φαρέτρας, an emendation prompted by the Hebrew text.

165, 166] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 165
‘
τὸς ἰσχύϊ; ‘ son”’ of TES Prov. 31° = aadevns ; ‘‘ son” of strokes, Deut. 252 = ἄξιος πληγῶν. And if, on the other hand, cases can be pointed out in which the LXX imitate! the characteristic 3, then the υἱός of the Greek text is not to be forthwith explained as caused by the translators’ ori- ental way of thinking, but rather as due to the original. At the very most we might speak of a ‘‘ Hebraism of transla- tion,” but not of a Hebraism simply.” But we are of opinion that it is not at all necessary, in this matter, to have recourse to a Hebraism in every case; we cannot, at least, Εν why such constructions ὃ as LXX Judg. 19” υἱοὶ παρανόμων, 1 Sam. 20 51 vids θανάτου," 2 Sam. 18 "ὃ υἱοὶ δυνάμεῶς, 2 Esd. [Hebr. Ezra] 41, 101 Ὁ [not 61 υἱοὶ ἀποικίας, Hos. [not Ezek.] 2+ τέκνα πορνείας, Is. 57* τέκνα ἀπωλείας, Should be looked upon as un-Greek.’ It is true, of course, that a Corinthian baggage-carrier or an Alexandrian donkey-driver would not so speak—the expressions are meant to be in elevated style and to have an impressive sound ; but for that very reason they might have been used by a Greek poet. Plato uses the word ἔκγονος ὃ in exactly the same way: Phaedr., p. 275 D, ἔκγονα τῆς Swypadias and Rep., pp. 506 E and 507 A, ἔκγονος τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ (genitive of τὸ ἀγαθόν). In the impressive style of speech on inscriptions and coins we find υἱός in a number of formal titles of honour ‘
h e\ ral / e\ nN Xr eX “- ὃ ΄, 8 suc as υἱὸς τῆς YEPOvVGLaS, υἱὸς Τῆὴς πόλεως, υἱὸς TOU Οἡμου,
1The author does not know in what proportion these cases are dis- tributed among the several books of the LXX, or to what degree the special method of the particular translator influenced the matter.
2 The genus ‘“‘Hebraisms” must be divided into two species, thus: ‘‘Hebraisms of translation,” and “ordinary Hebraisms ”’
ὅ These are the passages given by Cremer’, pp. 907 and 901 (= 956 and 950) with the references corrected.
4 In the passage 2 Sam. 27, cited by Cremer for vids θανάτου, stands υἱοὺς δυνατούς. Probably 2 Sam. 12° is meant.
5 LXX Ps. 88 [89]™ υἱὸς ἀνομίας, and 1 Macc. 2% υἱὸς τῆς ὑπερηφανίας may be added to these.
6 The references to this in the Clavis*, p. 429, at the end of the article τέκνον, are not accurate.
7 Particulars in Waddington, iii. 2, p. 26.
8 On this cf. also Paton and Hicks, The Inscriptions of Cos, p. 125 f. υἱὸς γερουσίας is also found in these, Nos. 95-97.
166 BIBLE STUDIES. [166, 167
υἱὸς ᾿Αφροδισιέων, etc. And thus, though the vids of the biblical passages above may have been occasioned, in the first instance, by the original, yet no one can call it un- Greek.—W. Schulze has also directed the author’s attention to the υἱὸς τύχης in the Tragedians, and filius fortunae in Horace.
Our judgment, then, in regard to the philological history of the above-cited expressions (Greek from the first) in Paul and the Epistles of Peter, may be formulated somewhat in this way. In no case whatever are they un-Greek; they might quite well have been coined by a Greek who wished to use impressive language. Since, however, similar turns of expression are found in the Greek Bible, and are in part cited by Paul and others, the theory of analogical formations will be found a sufficient explanation.
ὁ υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ.
It is very highly probable that the ‘‘ New Testament ” designation of Christ as the Son of God goes back to an ‘“ Old Testament ᾿᾿ form of expression. But when the question is raised as to the manner in which the ‘‘ Heathen-Christians ”’ of Asia Minor, of Rome, or of Alexandria, understood this designation, it seems equally probable that such “ Old Testa- ment presuppositions” were not extant among them. We are therefore brought face to face with the problem whether they could in any way understand the Saviour’s title of dignity in the light of the ideas of their locality. If this solemn form of expression was already current among them in any sense whatever, that would be the very sense in which they understood it when they heard it in the discourses of the missionary strangers: how much more so, then, seeing that among the ‘“‘ heathen”’ the expression Son of God was a technical term, and one which therefore stamped itself all the more firmly upon the mind. When the author came upon the expression for the first time in a non-Christian document (Pap. Berol. 7006! (Fayyaim, 22nd August, 7 A.D.):
ἔτους é[x]tov καὶ τριακοστοῦ [τῆς] Καίσαρος κρατήσεως θεοῦ
1 BU, vi., p. 180, No. 174.

167, 159,160] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 167
viov, where without doubt the Emperor Augustus is de- scribed as θεοῦ υἱός), he had no idea how very frequently the title is used for Augustus in the Inscriptions. Since that time he has become convinced that the matter stands thus: υἱὸς θεοῦ is a translation of the divi filius which is equally frequent in Latin Inscriptions.
Since, then, it is established that the expression vids θεοῦ was a familiar one in the Graeco-Roman world from the beginning of the first century, we can no longer ignore the fact ; it is indirectly of great importance for the history of the early-Christian title of Christ. The fact does not of course explain its origin or its primary signification, but it yields a contribution to the question as to how it might be understood in the empire.* It must be placed in due con- nection with what is said by Harnack? about the term θεός as used in the imperial period.
φίλος.
Friend was the title of honour given at the court of the Ptolemies to the highest royal officials. ‘‘ Greek writers, it is true, already used this name for the officials of the Persian king ; from the Persian kings the practice was adopted by Alexander, and from him again by all the Diadochi ; but we meet it particularly often as an Egyptian title.’* The LXX
1 Particular references are unnecessary. The author would name only the Inscription of Tarsus, interesting to us by reason of its place of origin, Waddington, iii. 2, No. 1476 (p. 348), also in honour of Augustus :-—
Αὐτοκράτορα Καίσαρα θεοῦ υἱὸν Σεβαστὸν 6 δῆμ]ος ὁ Ταρσέων. Perhaps the young Paul may have seen here the expression Son of God for the first time—long before it came to him with another meaning.
2 Tt may be just indicated here that the history of the terms used by Christians of the earlier time teaches us that other solemn expressions of the language of the imperial period were transferred to Christ.
* Lehrbuch der Dogmengeschichte, 1.2, Freiburg, 1888, pp. 103,159. [Eng. iran 1. ΡΡ. 1168, 179 ft)
4 Jacob, ZAW.x., p. 283. The examples in the Papyri and the Inscrip- tions are exceedingly numerous. Cf., in addition to the literature instanced by Jacob, Letronne, Rech., p. 58, A. Peyron, i., p. ὅθ, Grimm, HApAT, iii. (1853), p. 38, Letronne, Notices, xviii. 2, p. 165, Bernays, Die heraklitischen Briefe, p. 20, Lumbroso, Rech., pp. 191 ff., 228.
168 BIBLE STUDIES. [160, 161
were, therefore, quite correct (from their standpoint) in trans- lating WW prince by φίλος, Esth. 13, 218, 6°,—a fact not taken into consideration in the Concordance of Hatch and Redpath—and the same usage is exceedingly frequent in the Books of Maccabees.1. We think it probable that the Alexandrian writer of the Book of Wisdom was following this idiom when he spoke of the pious as φίλους θεοῦ (Wisd. 777, cf. ν. 1) ; similarly the Alexandrian Philo, Fragm. (M.) 11., p. 652, πᾶς σοφὸς θεοῦ φίλος, and De Sobr. (M.)i., p. 401, where he quotes the saying in LXX Gen. 18" (in our text ov μὴ κρύψω ἐγὼ ἀπὸ ᾿Αβραὰμ τοῦ παιδός μου) thus: μὴ ἐπικαλύψω ἐγὼ ἀπὸ ᾿Αβραὰμ τοῦ φίλου 5 μου. In explaining this, reference is usually made to Plato Legg. iv., p. 716, ὁ μὲν σώφρων θεῷ φίλος, ὅμοιος yap ; but, although it is not to be denied that this passage may perhaps have exercised an influence in regard to the choice of the expression, yet the Alexandrians would, in the first instance, understand it? in the sense to which they had been pre-disposed by the above- mentioned familiar technical usage of φίλος: φίλος θεοῦ denotes high honour in the sight of God4—nothing more nor less. The question whether friend of God is to be inter- preted as one who loved God or as one whom God loved, is not only insoluble ὅ but superfluous. Philo and the others would hardly be thinking of a ‘‘ relation of the will... . , such, how- ever, that the benevolence and love of God towards men are to be emphasised as its main element ”’.®
In John 1515 οὐκέτι λέγω ὑμᾶς SovrAovs ... ὑμᾶς δὲ
1 The expression φίλος τοῦ Καίσαρος, John{19 13, is doubtless to be under- stood in the light of Roman usage; but, again, amicus Caesaris is most likely dependent upon the court speech of the Diadochi.
2 Cf. James 2.3", Clem. Rom. 1 Cor. 101, 173.
3 The expression CGottesfrewnd (friend of God), again, used by the Ger- man mystics, is certainly dependent on the biblical passages, but they use it in a sense different from that mentioned in the text.
4 The designation of Abraham in particular (the standard personality of Judaism and of earlier Christianity) as the φίλος θεοῦ accords with the position of honour which he had in Heaven.
5 W. Beyschlag, Meyer, xv.° (1888), p. 144.
§ Grimm, HApAT. vi. (1860), p. 145.

167, 168] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 169
εἴρηκα φίλους, as can be seen by the contrast, φίλος has, of course, its simple sense of friend.

In Corinth the Gospel was understood otherwise than in Jerusalem, in Egypt otherwise than in Ephesus. The history of our Religion, in its further course, manifestly shows distinct phases of Christianity : we see, in succession or side by side, a Jewish Christianity and an International— a Roman, a Greek, a German and a Modern. The historical conditions of this vigorous development are to be found to a large extent in the profusion of the individual forms which were available for the ideas of the Evangelists and the Apostles. The variation in the meaning of religious terms has not always been to the disadvantage of religion itself : the Kingdom of God is not in words.
᾿ on Bee ΤΠ “Se ἮΝ
ἐπ ΠΝ “yea it ie
ii tne gs Ay ieee wae 1" ἜΝ ΠΤ ἡ ἣν ΠΤ] ἐν δον yl ἢ τὰ ee ἈΝ ) ΤΑΙ saat i op eer ofl? ty ty Tae 1 ΠῚ: ΡΝ, ἡ hay μα» ἢ, fie wh sec ; ἣν ὃ) batten 4 ah. aa aust Mia) ret ἀὐ very, Bike τὺ ΠΥ tee “Haw. ania ΤῊΝ ait Wi hanes ed fits |. fia ae bn anit ἀν fee ie ΧΟ] tha ae ἽΠΠΩΝ ὙΠ. Ww ἀπ μι ἡ αἱ αὐ Ἣν δ. eatsiigh Ἄν oki ᾿ . dd δ νην ἢ ἡ να ἀνα son ΔΗ ἀμ Bi ἜΝ BED 0 aN Mitt vad

INO

HURDLE CONTRIBUTIONS ΤῸ ΤῊΝ AISTORY OF THE LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE,
BEING NEUE BIBELSTUDIEN, MARBURG, 1897.
᾿
ὃ δὲ ἀγρός ἐστιν ὁ κόσμος.


FURTHER CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE HISTORY OF THE LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE.
In the third article! of Bibelstudien we endeavoured to correct the widespread notion that the New Testa- ment presents us with a uniform and isolated linguistic phenomenon. Most of the lexical articles in that section were intended to make good the thesis that a philological understanding of the history of New Testament (and also of Septuagint) texts could be attained to only when these were set in their proper historical connection, that is to say, when they were considered as products of later Greek.
Friedrich Blass in his critique” of Bibelstudien has ex- pressed himself with regard to this inquiry in the following manner :—
The third treatise again* begins with general reflections, the purport of which is that it is erroneous to regard New Testament, or even biblical, Greek as something distinct and isolated, seeing that the Papyrus documents and the Inscriptions are essentially of the same character, and belong simi- larly to that ‘“‘ Book of Humanity” to which ‘“ reverence” (Pretdt) is due.4
1.1.6. the foregoing article. The present article was published later by itself.
2 ThLZ. xx. (1895), p. 487.
5. This again refers to a previous remark in which Blass had “ willingly conceded ” to the author his ‘‘ general, and not always short, reflections ”’.
4 Blass has here fallen into a misunderstanding. The present writer remarked (above, p. 84) that he who undertakes to glean materials from the Inscriptions for the history of the New Testament language, is not merely obeying the voice of science, ‘‘ but also the behests of reverence to- wards the Book of Humanity”. The ‘Book of Humanity” is the New Testament. We are of opinion that every real contribution, even the slightest, to the historical understanding of the N. T. has not only scientific value, but should also be made welcome out of reverence for the sacred Book. We cannot honour the Bible more highly than by an endeavour to attain to the truest possible apprehension of its literal sense.
174 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 2
This appears to us to be the language of naturalism rather than of theology ; but, this apart, it remains an incontestable fact that, in the sphere of Greek literature, the New Testament books form a special group—one to be pri- marily explained by itself; first, because they manifest a peculiar genius, and, secondly, because they alone, or almost alone, represent the popular— in contrast to the literary—speech of their time in a form not indeed wholly, but yet comparatively, unadulterated, and in fragments of large extent. All the Papyri in the world cannot alter this—even were there never so many more of them: they lack the peculiar genius, and with it the intrinsic value ; further, they are to a considerable extent composed in the language of the office or in that of books. True, no one would maintain that the N. T. occu- pies an absolutely isolated position, or would be other than grateful! if some peculiar expression therein were to derive illumination and clearness from cognate instances in a Papyrus. But it would be well not to expect too much.
The author must confess that he did not expect this opposition from the philological side.2 The objections of such a renowned Graecist—renowned also in theological circles—certainly did not fail to make an impression upon him. They prompted him to investigate his thesis again, and more thoroughly, and to test its soundness by minute and detailed research. But the more opportunity he had of examining non-literary Greek texts of the imperial Roman period, the more clearly did he see himself compelled to stand out against the objections of the Halle Scholar.
Blass has meanwhile published his Grammar of New Testament Greek. In the Introduction, as was to be ex- pected, he expresses his view of the whole question. The astonishment with which the present writer read the fol- lowing, p. 2. may be conceived :—
. . - The spoken tongue in its various gradations (which, according to the rank and education of those who spoke it, were, of course, not absent from it) comes to us quite pure—in fact even purer than in the New Testa- ment itself—in the private records, the number and importance of which are
1 Blass writes denkbar, conceivable, but the sentence in that case seems to defy analysis. After consultation with the author, the translator has sub- stituted dankbar, and rendered as above.—T7.
2 He noticed only later that Blass had previously, TrLZ. xix. (1894), p- 338, incidentally made the statement that the New Testament Greek should “ be recognised as something distinct and subject to its own laws”.
3 Gottingen, 1896. [Eng. Trans., London, 1898. ]

N. 8] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. juris:
constantly being increased by the ever-growing discoveries in Egypt. Thus the New Testament language may be quite justly placed in this connection, and whoever would write a grammar of the popular language of that period on the basis of all these various witnesses and remains, would be, from the grammarian’s point of view, taking perhaps a more correct course than one who should limit himself to the language of the N. T.1
If the present writer judges rightly, Blass has, in these sentences, abandoned his opposition to the thesis above mentioned. For his own part, at least, he does not perceive what objection he could take to these words, or in what respect they differ from the statements the accuracy of which had previously been impugned by Blass. When in the Grammar we read further :—
Nevertheless those practical considerations from which we started will more and more impose such a limitation, for that which some Egyptian or
other may write in a letter or in a deed of sale is not of equal value with that which the New Testament authors have written—
it can hardly need any asseveration on the author’s part that with such words in themselves he again finds no fault. For practical reasons, on account of the necessities of biblical study, the linguistic relations of the New Testament, and of the Greek Bible as a whole, may continue to be treated by themselves, but certainly not as the phenomena of a special idiom requiring to be judged according to its own laws.
Moreover, that view of the inherent value of the ideas of the New Testament which Blass again emphasises in the words quoted from his Grammar, does not enter into the present connection. It must remain a matter of indifference to the grammarian whether he finds ἐάν used for ἄν in the New Testament or in a bill of sale from the Fayytm, and the lexicographer must register the κυριακός found in the pagan Papyri and Inscriptions with the same care as when it occurs in the writings of the Apostle Paul.
The following investigations have been, in part, arranged on a plan which is polemical. For although the author is now exempted, on account of Blass’s present attitude, from any need of controversy with him as regards principles, still
‘In the note to this Blass refers to the author’s Bibelstudien, p. 57 £. (above, p. 63 1.).
176 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 4
the historical method of biblical philology has very many opponents even yet.
In this matter, one thinks first of all of the unconscious opponents, viz., those who in the particular questions of exegesis and also of textual criticism stand under the charm of the “ New Testament’ Greek without ever feeling any necessity to probe the whole matter to the bottom. Among these the author reckons Willibald Grimm (not without the highest esteem for his lasting services towards the reinvigora- tion of exegetical studies), the late reviser of Wilke’s Clavis Novi Testamenti Philologica. A comparison of the second,! and the little-changed third,’ edition of his work with the English revision of Joseph Henry Thayer *—the best, because the most reliable of all dictionaries to the N. T. known to us—reveals many errors, not only in its materials, but also in its method. His book reflects the condition of philological research in, say, the fifties and sixties. At least, the notion of the specifically peculiar character of New Testament Greek could be upheld with more plausibility then than now; the New Testament texts were decidedly the most characteristic of all the products of non- literary and of later Greek which were then known. But materials have now been discovered in face of which the linguistic isolation of the New Testament—even that more modest variety of it which diffuses an atmosphere of vener- able romanticism around so many of our commentaries— must lose its last shadow of justification.
Among the conscious opponents, ὁ.6., those who oppose in matters of principle, we reckon Hermann Cremer. His Biblisch-theologisches Worterbuch der neutestamentlichen Grdcitét * has for its fundamental principle the idea of the formative power of Christianity in the sphere of language. This idea, as a canon of historical philology, becomes a fetter upon investigation. Further, it breaks down at once in the department of morphology. But the most conspicu-
1 Leipzig, 1879. 2 Tbid., 1888 [quoted in this article as Clavis *). 9 The author quotes the Corrected Hdition, New York, 1896. 4 8th Hdition, Gotha, 1895.
Ν. 5] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 177
ous peculiarity οἱ ‘‘ New Testament’ Greek—let us allow the phrase for once—is just the morphology. The canon breaks down very often in the syntax also. There are many very striking phenomena in this department which we cannot isolate, however much we may wish. The few Hebraising expressions in those parts of the New Testament which were in Greek from the first! are but an accidens which does not essentially alter the fundamental character of its language. The case in regard to these is similar to that of the Hebraisms in the German Bible, which, in spite of the many Semitic constructions underlying it, is yet a German book. There remains, then, only the lexical ele- ment in the narrower sense, with which Cremer’s book is, indeed, almost exclusively occupied. In many (not in all, nor in all the more important) of its articles, there appears, more or less clearly, the tendency to establish new “biblical ” or ‘‘ New Testament’’ words, or new “ biblical’ or ‘‘ New Testament ᾿᾿ meanings of old Greek words. That there are “biblical” and ‘‘ New Testament ’’ words—or, more cor- rectly, words formed for the first time by Greek Jews and Christians—and alterations of meaning, cannot be denied, Every movement of civilisation which makes its mark in history enriches language with new terms and fills the old speech with new meanings. Cremer’s fundamental idea is, therefore, quite admissible if it be intended as nothing more than a means for investigating the history of religion, But it not infrequently becomes a_philologico-historical principle: it is not the ideas of the early Christians which are presented to us, but their “Greek”. The correct attitude of a lexicon, so far as concerns the history of language, is only attained when its primary and persistent endeavour is to answer the question : ΤῸ what extent do the single words and conceptions have links of connection with contemporary usage? Cremer, on the other hand, prefers to ask: To what extent does Christian usage differ from heathen? In cases of doubt, as we think, the natural course
Those parts of the N. T. which go back to translations must be con-
sidered by themselves. 12
178 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 6
is to betake oneself placidly to the hypothesis of ordinary usage ; Cremer prefers in such cases to demonstrate some- thing which is distinctively Christian or, at least, dis- tinctively biblical.
In spite of the partially polemical plan of the following investigations, polemics are not their chief aim. Their purpose is to οἴου, towards the understanding of the New Testament, positive materials ἢ from the approximately con- temporary products of later Greek, and to assist, in what degree they can, in the liberation of biblical study from the bonds of tradition, in the secularising of it—in the good sense of that term. They take up again, one might say, the work of the industrious collectors of ‘‘ observations ”’ in last century. The reasons why the new spheres of observation disclosed since that time are of special importance for the linguistic investigation of the Greek Bible in particular, have been already set forth and corroborated by examples.’ In these pages the following works have been laid under contribution :—
1. Collections of Inscriptions: the Inscriptions of Per- gamus * and those of the Islands of the Aigean Sea, fasc. 1.°
1 On the other hand, the Greek Bible contains much, of course, which may promote the understanding of the Inscriptions and Papyri.
2 No intelligent reader will blame the author for having, in his investi- gations regarding the orthography and morphology, confined himself simply to the giving of materials without adding any judgment. Nothing is more dangerous, in Textual Criticism as elsewhere, than making general judgments on the basis of isolated phenomena. But such details may occasionally be of service to the investigator who is at home in the problems and has a general view of their connections.
3 Above, pp. 61-169; cf. also GGA. 1896, pp. 761-769: and ThLZ. xxi. (1896), pp. 609-615, and the other papers cited above, p. 84.
4 Altertiimer von Pergamon herausgegeben im Auftrage des Koniglich Preussischen Ministers der geistlichen, Unterrichts- und Medicinal-Angelegen- heiten, Band viii. ; Die Inschriften von Pergamon unter Mitwirkung von Ernst Fabricius wid Carl Schuchhardt herausgegeben von Max Frankel, (1) Bis zum Ende der Konigszeit, Berlin, 1890, (2) Rémische Zeit.—Inschriften auf Thon, Berlin, 1895 [subsequently cited as Perg. or Frankel].
5 Inscriptiones Graecae insularum Maris Aegaei consilio et auctoritate Academiae Litterarum Regiae Borussicae editae. Fasciculus primus : Inscrip- tiones Graecae insularum Rhodi Chalces Carpathi cum Saro Casi . . . edidit Fridericus Hiller de Gaertringen, Berolini, 1895 [subsequently cited as 12746.].ὄ

N. 7] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 179
2. Issues of Papyri: the Berlin Egyptian Documents, vol. 1. and vol. i1., parts 1-9;! also the Papyri of the Arch- duke Rainer, vol. 1.3
In reading these the author had in view chiefly the lexical element, but he would expressly state that a re- perusal having regard to the orthographical and morpho- logical features would assuredly repay itself. He desiderates, in general, a very strict scrutiny of his own selections. It is only the most important lexical features that are given here. The author, not having in Herborn the necessary materials for the investigation of the LXX at his disposal, had, very reluctantly, to leave it almost entirely out of consideration. But he has reason for believing that the Berlin and Vienna Papyri in particular, in spite of their comparative lateness, will yet yield considerable contributions towards the lexicon of the LXX, and that the same holds good especially of the Inscriptions of Pergamus in connection with the Books of Maccabees.
It may be said that the two groups of authorities have been arbitrarily associated together here. But that is not altogether the case. They represent linguistic remains from Asia Minor® and Egypt, that is to say, from the regions which, above all others, come into consideration in connec- tion with Greek Christianity. And, doubtless, the greater part of the materials they yield will not be merely local, or confined only to the districts in question.
The gains from the Papyri are of much wider extent than those from the Inscriptions. The reason is obvious. We might almost say that this difference is determined by the disparity of the respective materials on which the writing
1 Aegyptische Urkunden aus den Kéniglichen Museen zu Berlin heraus- gegeben von der Generalverwaltung: Griechische Urkunden. LErster Band, Berlin, [completed] 1895 ; Zweiter Band, Heft 1-9, Berlin, 1894 ff. [subse- quently cited as BU.).
2 Corpus Papyrorum Raineri Archiducis Austriae, vol. 1. Griechische Texte herausgegeben von Carl Wessely, i. Band: Rechtsurkunden unter Mit- wirkung von Ludwig Mitteis, Vienna, 1895 (subsequently cited as PER.].
3 We need only think of the importance of Pergamus for the earlier period of Christianity.
180 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 8
was made. Papyrus is accommodating and is available for private purposes; stone is unyielding, and stands open to every eye in the market-place, in the temple, or beside the tomb. The Inscriptions, particularly the more lengthy and the official ones, often approximate in style to the literary language, and are thus readily lable to affectation and mannerism ; what the papyrus leaves contain is much less affected, proceeding, as it does, from the thousand require- ments and circumstances of the daily life of unimportant people. If the legal documents among the Papyri show a certain fixed mode of speech, marked by the formal- ism of the office, yet the many letter-writers, male and female, express themselves all the more unconstrainedly. This holds good, in particular, in regard to all that is, re- latively speaking, matter of form. But also in regard to the vocabulary, the Inscriptions afford materials which well repay the labour spent on them. What will yet be yielded by the comprehensive collections of Inscriptions, which have not yet been read by the author in their continuity, may be surmised from the incidental discoveries to which he has been guided by the citations given by Frankel. What might we not learn, e.g., from the one inscription of Xanthus the Lycian ! 1
Would that the numerous memorials of antiquity which our age has restored to us, and which have been already so successfully turned to account in other branches of science, were also explored, in ever-increasing degree, in the interest of the philologico-historical investigation of the
Greek Bible! Here is a great opportunity for the ascertain- ment of facts !
1 See below, swb καθαρίζω, βιάζομαι, ἱλάσκομαι.
ils NOTES ON THE ORTHOGRAPHY.
The orthographical problems of the New Testament writings are complicated in the extreme. But, at all events, one thing is certain, viz., that it is a delusion to search for a “New Testament” orthograpby—if that is understood to signify the spelling originally employed by the writers. In that respect one can, at most, attain to conjectures regarding some particular author: ‘the’? New Testament cannot really be a subject of investigation! The present writer would here emphasise the fact that — notwith- standing all other differences—he finds himself, in this matter, in happy agreement with Cremer, who has overtly opposed the notion that an identical orthography may, without further consideration, be forced upon, e.g., Luke, Paul and the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews.? The first aim of the investigation should perhaps be this :—to establish what forms of spelling were possible in the imperial period in Asia Minor, Egypt, etc. We need not, of course, pay any attention to manifest errors in writing. The fol- lowing observed facts are intended to yield materials for this purpose.
1. VARIATION OF VOWELS.
(a) The feminine termination -ta for -eta.2 That in 2 Cor. 10: στρατίας (= στρατείας), and not στρατιᾶς, 15
1See above, p. 81. W. Schmid makes some pertinent remarks in GGA. 1895, p. 36 f.
2 Cremer’, p. xiii. (Preface to the 4th edition).
3 Winer-Schmiedel, ὃ 5, 13 ὁ (p. 44); Blass, Grammatik, p. 9 [Eng. Trans., p. 8].
182 BIBLE STUDIES. [Ν. 10
intended, should no longer be contested. It is really super- fluous to collect proofs of the fact that στρατεία could also be written otpatia. Nevertheless, the mode of spelling the word in the Fayytim Papyri should be noted. In these there is frequent mention of campaigns, the documents having not seldom to do with the concerns of soldiers either in service or retired. στρατεία is given by PER. 1.3 (83-84 A.D.), BU. 14011.23 (ca. 100 A.D.) 5814.15 (133 A.D.), 25615 (reign of Antoninus Pius), 18015 (172 a.p.), 592, 1.6 (2nd cent. A.D.), 62514 (Qnd-3rd cent. 4.D.); otpatia by 19539 (161 a.p.), 448 [= 161]. (2nd half of 2nd cent. a.p.), 614 20 (217 a.p.). Also in 61323 (reign of Antoninus Pius), where Viereck has otpatvais, the author would prefer the accentu- ation στρατίαις.
(Ὁ) Interchange of a and «. Of éyyapevo (Matt. 5* δ, Mark 157 &*B*) for ayyapevw,! Tischendorf says in con- nection with the latter passage, ““ quam formam in usu fuisse haud incredibile est, hine nec aliena a textu’’. A papyrus of cent. 4 shows also the spelling with ε, in the substantive : BU. 21, 1.16 (locality uncertain, 340 A.D.) évyapias.
Aerpatia, 2 Tim. 4" C and others (A., Δερματία) for Δαλματία," according to Winer-Schmiedel, ὃ 5, 20 ὁ (p. 50), is ‘‘probably Alexandrian, but perhaps also the original form”. BU. 937 (Fayyim, 2-3 cent. A.D.) gives e in δελματική; on the other hand, PHR. xxi.ie (Fayytim, 230 A.D.) has δαλματική. We should hardly postulate an ““ Alexandrian ”’ spelling.
(c) The contraction of κεἰ = Wu to te long® in the (New Testament) cases ταμεῖον and πεῖν, occurs also in the
1 Winer-Schmiedel, ὃ 5, 20 ὁ (p. 50); Blass, Grammatik, p. 21 [Eng. Trans., p. 20 f.].
2“ Delm. as well as Dalm. occurs also in Latin” (Blass, Gramm., p. 21. [Eng. Trans., p. 21.] P. Jiirges has called the author’s attention also to the excursus CZ. iii. 1, Ὁ. 280.
* Winer-Schmiedel, ὃ 5, 23 ὃ (p. 53 f.); Blass, Gramm., p. 23 [Eng. Trans., p. 23).
Ν.10, 11] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 183
Papyri. The author met with ταμιεῖον only once, BU. 1065 (Fayytim, 199 a.p.) ; everywhere 6156 ταμεῖον : PER. 113.30 (83-84 a.D.), BU. 75 i. 12 (2nd cent. A.D.), 15 πὶ 16 (197 A.D. ?), 1566 (201 A.D.) 71.8 (247 a.D.), 8 11.30 (248 a.D.), 968 (2nd half of 3rd cent. a.p.). JTetv occurs in BU. 34 1.7. 17. 22. 23, 111. 2, Iv. 3.10 (place and date ?), wiv ibid. iv.257 and once more BU. 5516 (Fayytim, Arabian period).
2. VARIATION OF CONSONANTS.
(a) Duplication. The materials with regard to ἀρραβών given in Winer-Schmiedel, ὃ 5, 26 ὁ (p. 56 f.) may be supple- mented: the author found ἀρραβών only in BU. 2406 (Fay- yam, 167-168 A.D.) ;* ἀραβών, on the other hand, in BU. 446 [= 801. ττ. 15 (reign of Marcus Aurelius, a fairly well written contract), (in line 2. of the same document, in the imperfect signature of one of the contracting parties, we find ἀλαβών), 601 1 (Fayytim, 2nd cent. A.D., a badly written private letter), PER. xix. 9.16. 21.24 (Fayytim, 330 A.D. a well written record of a legal action). The assertion of Westcott and Hort (in view of their usual precision a suspicious one), that ἀραβών is a purely ““ Western” reading, is hardly tenable. The author, moreover, would question the scientific procedure of Winer-Schmiedel’s assertion that the spelling ἀρραβών is “established” by the Hebrew origin of the word* It would be established only if we were forced to pre- suppose a correct etymological judgment in all who used the word. But we cannot say by what considerations they
1 All the Papyri cited here are from the Fayytim.
2 F. Krebs, the editor of this document, erroneously remarks on Ὁ. 46: “ πεῖν = rlvew”’. In connection with this and with other details W. Schmid, GGA. 1895, pp. 26-47, has already called attention to the Papyri.
3 This passage is also referred to by Blass, Gramm., p.11. [Eng. Trans., p. 10, note 4.]
4 Blass similarly asserts, Gramm., p. 11 [Eng. Trans., p. 10], that the duplication is ‘‘ established ” in the Semitic form.
5 The matter is still more evident in proper names. For example, ᾿Αρέθας, as the name of Nabatean kings, is undoubtedly “established ” by etymological considerations; on the other hand, the Inscriptions and other ancient evidence, so far as the author knows, all give ᾿Αρέτας, and thus ᾿Αρέτα in 2 Cor. 11* may be considered ‘‘ established ” without the slightest
184 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 12
were influenced in orthographical matters. It can no longer be questioned that the spelling ἀραβών was very common. Who knows whether some one or other did not associate the non-Greek word with the Arabs ?! A popular tradition of this kind might, in the particular case, invalidate the ety- mological considerations advanced by us from the standpoint of our present knowledge, and so induce us to uphold an etymologically false spelling as ‘‘ established ”’.
γέννημα and γένημα. The spelling with a single ν and, consequently, the derivation from γίνεσθαι have been already established by the Ptolemaic Papyri.? It is con- firmed by the following passages from Fayyim Papyri of the first four Christian centuries, all of which have to do with fruits of the field: * BU. 19713 (17 a.D.), 1713 (156 a.D.), 495 (179 A.D.), 1889 (186 a.D.), 817 (189 a.D.), 67s (199 «.D.), 61 1.8 (200 a.D.), 5296 and 3367 (216 a.pD.), 645 (217 Α.}.), 8 1. 28 (middle of 3rd cent. a.D.), 4116 (814 A.D.) ; cf. also γενηματο- γραφεῖν in BU, 28219 (after 175 A.D.).
A fluctuation in the orthography of those forms of yevvaw and γίνομαι which are identical except for the v (v) has often been remarked ;* thus, γενηθέντα, undoubtedly from yevvaw, occurs also in the Papyri: BU. 1101 (Fayyaim, 138-139 a.p.) and 2816 (Fayytim, 183 a.p.). Both documents are official birth-notices. On the other hand, the “ correct ”’ γεννηθείς is thrice found in vol. i. of the Berlin Papyri. The uncertainty of the orthography ὃ is well indicated in
misgiving. It is exceedingly probable (according to the excellent conjecture of Schiirer, Gesch. d. jiid. Volkes im Zeitalter Jesu Christi, i., Leipzig, 1890, p. 619 [Eng. Trans., i., ii., p. 359]) that this spelling was influenced by the desire to Hellenise the barbaric name by assimilation to aperh.—Moreover, also Blass, Gramm., p. 11 [Kng. Trans., p. 11], takes this view in regard to ᾿Ιωάνης.
1 ΟἹ. the case οὗ ἀλαβών for ἀραβών, as above, with the well-known ἀλαβάρχης for apaBapyxns.
2 Above, p. 109 f.; cf. Blass, Gramm., p. 11 [Eng. Trans., p. 11].
3 The author has not found the spelling with vy anywhere in the Papyri.
4 Winer-Schmiedel, § 5, 26 a (p. 56).
5 The problem of orthography became later a point of controversy in the History of Dogma; cf. A. Harnack, Lehrbuch der Dogmengeschichte, ii.*, Freiburg and Leipzig, 1894, p. 191 f. [Eng. Trans., iv., p. 12 ff.]
Ν. 13] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 185
BU. 111 (Fayyfim, 138-139 a.p.), where linea has ἐπι-
γεννήσεως ; liners, ἐπιγενήσεως.
(Ὁ) Interchange of consonants. Σμύρνα, Zuvpva.! Perg. 203 3. u.17 (pre-Christian) Σ᾽ μύρνα, IMAe. 1481 (Rhodes, date ?) 2 μυρναῖος, 468 (Rhodes, date?) Suvpvaios. On the other hand, Perg. 1274 (2nd cent. B.c., cf. Frankel, p. 482) Ζμυρ- vaios, BU. 1u (Fayyaim, 3rd cent. A.D.) μύρου καὶ ζμύρνης."
σπυρίς, sdupis. The Ptolemaic Papyri have both spellings ;* the author found the diminutive twice in the later Papyri from the Fayydm, and, indeed, with the vulgar aspiration : σφυρίδιον PER. xlvii.s (2nd-3rd cent. A.D.) and (a vulgar abbreviation)  σφυρίτιν Ὁ, BU. 247 3.4.6. (2nd-3rd cent. A.D.).
1 Cf. Winer-Schmiedel, § 5, 27 d (p. 59); Blass, Gramm., p. 10. [Eng. Trans., p. 10.]
2 Cf. also BU. 696 (Fayytim, 120 A.D.) voulCuaros. 3 Above, p. 158.
4 Examples of this abbreviation from the Inscriptions are given by Frankel, p. 341.
1. NOTES ON THE MORPHOLOGY.
The New Testament references are again very seldom given in the following ; they can easily be found in the cited passages of the Grammars.
1. DECLENSION.
(a) σπείρας was not found by the author in the Papyri: they seem always to have σπείρης :1 BU. 732 (Fayytim, 135 4.D.), 1362 (Fayyim, 135 a.p.), 14210 (159 A.D), 447 [= 26]12 (Fayyim, 175 4.p.), 2413 (Fayyam, 177 a.p.). The materials from the Inscriptions of Italy and Asia Minor which Frankel adduces in connection with σπείρα = Thiasos, also exhibit 7 in the genitive and dative.
(6) The Genitive ἡμίσους 15 found in PER. ΧΙ. ὁ (93 a.D.), BU. 328 τ) (188-139 a.D.), PER. cxcviil. 17 ete. (1389 a.p.), BU. 781 (148-149 a.p.), 2236: (210-211 a.pD.), PER. clxxvi.is (225 4.D.); all these Papyri are from the Fayytim. A form noteworthy on account of the genitive Tov ἡμίσου in the LXX,° occurs in BU. 183.4 (Fayyim, 85 A.D.), viz., ἥμισον μέρος. This may be a clerical error (line 21 has the correct ἥμισοι [oc = υἹ μέρος), but it is more probable that here also we have a vulgar form ἥμεσος which was common in Egypt.
1 Winer-Schmiedel, § 8, 1 (p. 80 f.); Blass, Gramm, p. 25 [Eng. Trans., p. 25], gives other examples from the Papyri.
2 Winer-Schmiedel, § 9, 6 (p. 87); Blass, Gramm., Ὁ. 27 [Eng. Trans.,. p. 27).
3 Winer-Schmiedel, § 9, 6 (p. 87), note 4; here we already find the Papyrus, Notices, xviii. 2, 230 (154 a.p.), cited in reference to the form.
Ν. 15] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 187
(c) δύο The following forms in the Fayyim Papyri are worthy of notice:? δύω BU. 2084 (158-159 a.p.), dvev BU, 28225 (after 175 a.D.), δυεῖν BU. 2565 (reign of Anto- ninus Pius), δυσί BU. 197s (17 A.D.) PER. cexlii.10 (40 a.D.), 1.7 (88-84 4.D.), BU. 5386 (100 a.p.), 866 (155 a.p.), 1667 (lot Asp’) 26270 (alter 175) a.m), 326117 (189 ἃ τὺ), 303i19 (586 A.D.).
2. PROPER NAMES.
Abraham is Graecised "ABpayos (as in Josephus) in BU. 5851.3 (Fayytim, after 212 s.p.) Πααβῶς ᾿Αβράμου; on the other hand, in Fayyim documents of the Christian period, ᾿Αβραάμιος 3957 (599-600 A.p.), 40113 (618 A.D.), 367 sete. (Arabian period); not Graecised, “A8paapu 103, verso1 (6th-7th cent. A.D.).
᾿Ακύλας. Clavis*, p. 16, simply gives ᾿Ακύλου as the genitive for the N. T., although a genitive does not occur in it. The Fayyim Papyri yield both ᾿Ακύλου BU. 4846 (201-202 a.p.) and ᾿Ακύλα 71 (189 A.D.).—The name of the veteran C. Longinus Aquila, which occurs in the last- mentioned document, is written Ἀκύλας in 326 11.19 (end of the 2nd cent. A.D.) and ᾿Αἀκύλλας in the fragment of a duplicate of the same document which is there cited; this doubling of the ἃ is not unknown also in New Testament manuscripts.
‘Avtimaltpol|ls. It is not wholly without interest that the name of an inhabitant of Pergamus, which occurs in Rev. 2, is still found in Pergamus in the beginning of the 3rd cent. A.D.: Perg. 5242 (not older than the time of Caracalla?) [A] ντιπάτρου.
Βαρναβᾶς. On p. 310 below the author expresses the conjecture that the name Barnabas* arose from the
1 Winer-Schmiedel, § 9, 11 (p. 90).
> Exhaustiveness is not guaranteed: it was only lately that the author directed his attention to the point. In particular, he has no general idea as to the usage of the common forms in the Papyyi.
3 Cf. Tischendorf on Rom. 16% and Acts 182.
* Cf. A. Meyer, Jesu Muttersprache, Freiburg and Leipzig, 1896, p. 47 f., and E. Nestle, Philologica sacra, Berlin, 1896, p. 19 f.
188 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 16
Graecising of the Semitic BapveBotds! or Βαρναβοῦς, which could readily happen by the alteration of the Semitic termination -ods into -as.2, The termination -@s was in general a very popular one in the Graecising of Semitic proper names: of this there occur numerous biblical ex- amples. An example somewhat out of the way, but in itself worthy of notice, may be noted here. Probably the oldest of the Inscriptions found at Pergamus is the dedicatory Inscription Perg. 1, Παρταρας ᾿Αθηναίηι, which, from the character of the writing, is to be assigned to the 4th cent. A.D. ‘The Greek dedicatory Inscription is preceded by two lines, the script of which I am unable to determine; but there is no doubt that they contain the dedication in the language of the dedicator, whose name marks him as a foreigner. The foreign script runs from right to left, since, assuming this direction, we can recognise without difficulty the name of the dedicator with its initial B, as the beginning of the second line” (Frankel, p. 1, ad loc.). There is no mention here of a fact which could certainly not remain unnoticed, viz., that the ‘‘foreign”’ script, at least at the beginning (i.e., at the right) of the second line, is plainly Greek with the letters reversed: Greek letters undoubtedly occur also in other parts of the mutilated text. One may assume that the Semitic (?) text is given in Greek “‘ reverse-
1 The reference from the Inscriptions for this name which is given below belongs to the 3rd or 4th century a.p. P. Jensen has called the author’s attention to a much older passage. In the Aramaic Inscription of Palmyra No. 73, of the year 114 B.c. (in M. de Vogiié’s Syrie Centrale, In- scriptions Sémitiques . . ., Paris, 1868, p. 53) mention is made of a Barnebo (yan):
? Blass, ThLZ. xx. (1895), p. 488, holds this supposition to be absolutely impossible. According to A. Hilgenfeld, Berl. Philol. Wochenschr., 1896, p. 650, it deserves consideration, but also requires to be tested. The author stands by his hypothesis quite confidently—the more so as Blass has not mentioned his counter-reasons. He has been informed by several well- known Semitists that they accept it; cf. most recently, G. Dalman, Die Worte Jesu, vol. i., Leipzig, 1898, p. 32.—From the genitive Βαρνα, CIG. 4477 (Larissa in Syria, ca. 200 a.p.) we may most likely infer a nominative Bapvas. The author does not venture to decide whether this might be a pet form of Βαρναβᾶς (cf. Heinrici, Meyer, v 8, [1896], p. 525).
N. 17] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 189
script’ (Spiegelschrift) in the first two lines. The stone- cutter who, as Frankel also thinks, was perhaps the dedi- cator himself, had, on this view, the Semitic (?) text before him, transcribed it letter by letter into Greek, and, more- over, lighted upon the original idea of one by one revers- ing the Greek letters (now standing in Semitic order). It is, of course, possible that this hypothesis is fundamentally wrong. It is certain, however, that the Greek name Ilaptapas occurs in the ‘foreign’ text in the doubly- divergent form Baptapa. The letter which follows Baprapa cannot be a sigma; the non-Greek form is Baptapa,—by all analogies a personal name formed with Aa son. The author does not venture to make any assertion with regard to the second constituent -tapa;! he has not met with the name elsewhere. By the addition of as the name has been Graecised, Βαρταρᾶς or according to the carver, Παρταρᾶς."
Aopxas. The examples* in connection with Acts 9.36. 39 may be supplemented by [Mde. 569 (Rhodes, date ?).
Ἴσακ. The spelling ‘Icax (for Icaax), in Cod. xg, in both of D, often implied in the old Latin versions, and probably also underlying the Graecised "Icaxos of Josephus, is found in PER. xliv.s (Fayytim, 3rd-4th cent., A.p.), in which an Αὐρήλιος ‘Ioax is mentioned; often also in the Fayyim documents of the Christian period: BU. 3055 (556 A.D.), 3037 (586 a.D.), 476 and 1735 (6th-7th cent. A.D.).
3. VERB.
(a) Augment. jnvotiynv* (Mark 7*, Acts 12”, Rev. 11%, 15°): BU. 326 11.10 (Fayyaim, 194 a.D.) ἠνύγη [v = οι], said of a will.°
1 Aram. yan ? i.e., son of the palace? Or son of Therach, Terah LXX Oappa and Θαρα, but, as a place-name, with τ for JJ, Numb. 33"? Tapaé) 3 ?
2 The author does not know of any other examples of m for Ἢ. The
accentuation -ἂς should probably be preferred to the Παρτάρας given by Frankel.
3 Cf. Wendt, Meyer, iii.*/7 (1888), p. 235. 4 Winer-Schmiedel, § 12, 7 (p. 103). > For the reading see ibid., Supplement, p. 359.
190 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 18
(ὁ) Conjugation. tétevxa' is fairly well authenticated in Heb. 8°; cf. BU. 33826 (Fayyaim, 2nd-3rd cent. A.D.) ἐπι- τετευχότας, unnecessarily altered by the editor to émutetu- χότας.
nea sdauke 19.550 Ῥεὶ" 25, Acts 147 DD) ΒΟ 6071s (Fayytm, 163 a.D.) κατῆξαν.
ἔλειψα" (Acts 6", Luke 5" Ὁ, Mark 12" yy, always in the compound κατέλειψα) also occurs in the following Fayyam Papyri: BU. 18319 (85 A.D.) καταλείψῃ, 17610 (reign of Hadrian) catanreipar, 867.13 (155 A.D.) Katanrein,* 467 6 (no note of place, ca. 177 A.D.) καταλείψας, 16413 (2nd-3rd cent. A.D.) καταλεῖψμαι. The same compound is found also in the passages Clem. 2 Cor. 51, 101, and Herm. Similit. 8, 35° cited by Blass, also in LXX 1 Chron. 28°, and CJG. 413731. (Montalub in Galatia, date?); 40636: (Ancyra, date?) has ἐνκατάλυψε. It is possible that the use of the form is confined to this compound.
npwaynv® (ἃ Cor. 1274) occurs also in the fragment of a document which relates to the Jewish war of Trajan, BU. 34112 (Fayyim, 2nd cent. a.D.). On p. 359 of vol. 1. of that collection, ἡρπάγησαν is given as the corrected reading of this.
The attaching of lst aorist terminations to the 2nd aorist* is of course very frequent in the Papyri. The author has noted the following :—
1 Winer-Schmiedel, § 13, 2, Note 2 (p. 104); Blass, Gramm., p.57. [Hng. Trans., p. 57.]
2 Winer-Schmiedel, § 13, 10 (p. 109); Blass, Gramm., p. 42. [Hng Trans., p. 43.]
5. Winer-Schmiedel, § 13, 10 (p. 109); Blass, Gramm., p. 43. [Hng. Trans., p. 43.]
4 The Editor, P. Viereck, makes the unnecessary observation, ‘“‘/. [read] «aTtaAtrn”’.
5 Winer-Schmiedel, § 13, 10 (p. 110); Blass, Gramm., p. 43. [Eng. Trans., p. 43.]
5 Of. above, p. 68.
7 Winer-Schmiedel, § 13, 13 (p. 111 f.); Blass, Gramm., p. 44 ἔ, [Hng. Trans., p. 45 f.]
Ν. 18,19] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 191
ἐγενάμην: PER. 1. 2 (Fayyim, 83-84 A.D.) γενάμενος along with the frequent γενόμενος, BU. 4647 (132-133 A.D.) yevapeva together with yevowér7[y] in line 1, 3001 (Fayytim, 148 A.D.) παραγενώμενος, 3014 (Fayytim, 157 A.D.) γεναμένου, 115 11.295 (Fayyaim, 189 a.pD.) γεναμένοις, 4905 (Fayytim, 2nd cent. A.D.) γεναμένη, 531 1.1 (Fayyaim, 2nd cent. A.D.) πα[ρ]αγενάμενος, 21 11.5 (340 A.D.) γεναμένου, 324 (Fayyim. 605 A.D.) γεναμένων.
yXOa: BU. 53011 (1st cent. A.D.) ἤλθας, 726 (191 A.D.) ἐπῆλθαν, 51513 (193 A.D.) ἐπε[ε]σῆλθαν, 1465 (2nd-3rd cent. A.D.) ἐπῆλθαν, 1031 (6th-7th cent. A.D.) ἦλθαν; all these Papyri come from the Fayyim.
ἔσχα (Acts 7% D, cuvécyav): BU. 451s (1st-2nd cent. A.D.) ἔσχαμεν.
ἔλαβα: BU. 5622 (Fayyaim, beginning of 2nd cent. A.D.) ἐξέλαβα, 4239 (2nd cent. A.D.) ἔλαβα, 2611s and 449s (both from the Fayyfim, 2nd-3rd cent. A.D.) ἔλαβα.
The use of the terminations -a, -as in the imperfect! is shown in BU. 5959 (Fayyaim, 70-80 A.D.) ἔλεγας, 5155 (Fayyaim, 193 A.D.) ὠφείλαμεν, 157 5 (Fayyim, 2nd-3rd cent. A.D.) ἐβάσταζαν. We might add 44s (Fayytiim, 102 a.D.) opidate: the augment is wanting,” as in BU. 281i (Fayyaim, reign of Trajan) ὄφ[εἾλεν, and 340u (Fayytim, 148-149 A.bD.) ὀφιλεν.
The termination -cav for -v in the 3rd plural® is attested by BU. 369 (Fayyam, 2nd-3rd cent. A.D.) ἐπήλθοσαν, and (in a contracted verb) 2514 (Fayyim, 81 A.D.) προεγ[ αμ]οῦσαν ; also in the document by the same hand 1836 (Fayyaim, 85 A.D.) προεγαμοῦσαν ;* the last two examples occur in the phrase καθὼς καὶ προεγαμοῦσαν, most likely a formula in marriage-contracts.
1 Winer-Schmiedel, ὃ 13, 13 (p. 112); Blass, Gramm., p. 45. [Eng. Trans., p. 46.]
? Most likely an assimilation to ὄφελον.
5 Winer-Schmiedel, § 13, 14 (p. 112 f.); Blass, Gramm., p. 45 f. [Hng. Trans., p. 46.]
4 The editors accentuate rpocyduoveay.
192 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 19, 20
The termination -av for -ace in the 3rd plural perfect} occurs in BU. 59719 (Fayyim, 75 A.D.) yéyovay (Rom. 167 ny AB, Rev. 21° μι" A) and 3281.6 (Fayyfim, 138-139 a.p.) μετεπιγέγραφαν."
The termination -ες for -as in the 2nd singular perfect and aorist® is found with remarkable frequency in the badly- written private letter BU. 261 (Fayytiim, 2nd-3rd cent. A.D.?): line 14 δέδωκες, 17 Hpnyes (= εἴρηκες), 28 σὺ οἶδες, 534: ἔγραψες : the last form occurs also in the private letter 38 14 (Fayyim Ist cent. A.D.).
δίδωμι: The Papyri yield a number of examples of δίδω (διδῶ 2) for di@ue—all from the Fayyim. In BU. 961 οι (2nd-3rd cent. A.D. ?, badly written) is found οὐδὲν ἐγὼ δίδω (διδῶ 9),) 972 (201-202 A.D.) ἐπιδίδω, 3819 (1st cent. A.D.) δίδει as 3rd sing. pres. (= δίδει).---δεδ ὦ (= διδόω) 15 indi- cated by 8622 (155 A.D.) διδοῦντος, and already by 4415 (102 A.D.) ἀνδιδοῦντα ἴ (but in line 14 διδόντα).
τίθημι. According to Winer-Schmiedel, ὃ 14, note 11 (p. 121) there appear to be no indubitable derivations from a verb τίθω. But the well-written Papyrus BU. 326 1.16
1 Winer-Schmiedel, § 13, 15 (p. 113); Blass, Gramm., p. 45. [Hng. Trans., p. 46.]
2 Conversely, -ασι for -av in BU. 2755 (Fayytim, 215 A.D.) ἐπήλθασι.
3 Winer-Schmiedel, § 13, 16 (p. 113 f.); Blass, Gramm., p. 46. [Kng. Trans., p. 46.]
4 Winer-Schmiedel, § 14, 11 ff. (p. 121 f.); Blass, Gramm.,p. 48 f. [Eng Trans., p. 49 1.1 Neither writer takes notice of 1 Cor. 7° A ἀποδιδέτω.
> It is true that line 2 has μὴ 8:5: αὐτῇ (cf. Supplement, p. 358). The editor, F. Krebs, accentuates δίδι, and explains thus: ‘J. [read] δίδει = δίδωσι ᾿᾽. The present writer considers this impossible: δίδι (= δίδει) is rather an im- perative of δίδωμι, formed in accordance with τίθει. Similarly BU. 6026 Fayytim, 2nd cent. A.D.) ἐδείδι (=ediSe) on the analogy of ἐτίθει. Other assimilations to the formation of τίθημι in the Fayyim Papyri are: 3608 (108-109 a.p.) the imperative wapddere, and 1593 (216 A.D.) ἐξέδετο;; the latter form already in PER. cexxii.is (2nd cent. a.D.).
6 ἐπιδίδω could also be an abbreviation of ἐπιδίδωμι, specially as it occurs in acommon formula. Hence the editor, U. Wilcken, writes ἐπιδίδω(μι).
7 Apocope of the preposition, like BU. 867 (Fayytim, 155 a.p.) καλείψῃ ; in contrast with line 12 of the same Papyrus καταλείψῃ (not, however, παδώσω BU. 39 2 which has been corrected, in accordance with a more exact reading p. 354, to ἀποδώσω). Cf. Winer-Schmiedel, § 5, 22 c, note 47 (p. 53).
Ν. 90, 21] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 193
(Fayyfim, 189 a.p.) yields παρακατατίθομαι.---τ Oa (-- τιθέω) is indicated by BU. 3501s (Fayyaim, reign of Trajan) ὑπο- τιθοῦσα, which, however, perhaps depends in this place merely on euphony ; it stands in the following connection: ἐνοικοδομοῦσα καὶ ἐπισκευάζουσα καὶ Trodovca* καὶ ὑποτι- θοῦσα καὶ ἑτέροις μεταδιδοῦσα.
Svvopac! is often attested in the Fayyim Papyni: BU. 24610 (Qnd-8rd cent. A.D.), 888 11. 8 (2nd-8rd cent. A.D.), 1595 (216 A.D.) duvdpevos,—also 61420 (217 A.D.). In 348s (156 A.D.) there occurs ὡς ἂν δύνοι, which must certainly be 3rd singular; this would involve a δύνω."
1 Winer-Schmiedel, § 14, 17 (p. 123); Blass, Gramm., p. 48. [Eng.. Trans., p. 49.]
2 The particular sentence (from a private letter) is not quite clear to the author, but he considers it impossible that the form could be derived from the well-known δύνω. F. Krebs also places δύνοι in connection with δύναμαι. in his index.
13
IT. NOTES ON THE VOCABULARY AND THE SYNTAX.
1. So-cALLED HEBRAISMS.
ἀναστρέφομαι and ἀναστροφή.
Quite a multitude of examples, all of the Roman period (after 133 B.c.), of the moral signification of the verb,! which is not to be explained as a Hebraism, and to which attention was called above, p. 88, are yielded by the since-published second volume of the Inscriptions of Pergamus. Putting aside Perg. 25239, where the word is got only by a violent restoration, the author would refer to 4595 καλῶς καὶ ἐνδόξως ἀναστραφῆναι (cf. Heb. 13° καλῶς ἀναστρέφεσθαι, James 3 1", 1 Pet. 213 καλὴ ἀναστροφή), 4704 [ἐν πᾶσ]ιν ἀνεσί τραμ]μένον ἀξίως [τῆς πόλεως] and 49658. [ἀ]ναστρεφομένην καλῶς καὶ εὐσεβῶς καὶ ἀξίως τῆς πόλεως (cf. the Pauline περιπατεῖν ἀξίως c. gen.); also 545 ἀναστραφέν[ τα] IMAe. 10337¢. (Carpathus, 2nd cent. B.c.?) φιλοδόξως ἀνέ σ]τραπίται) may be still older than any of these. Frankel, p. 16, cites further CIG. 1770 (letter of Flaminin) οἱ οὐκ ἀπὸ τοῦ βελτίστου εἰωθότες ἀναστρέφεσθαι.3
For ἀναστροφή, in the ethical sense, [Ae. 10326 (Car- pathos, 2nd cent. B.c.) should be noted.
εἰς. The use of εἰς for expressing the purpose of donations,
collections or other expenditure (discussed above, p. 117f.),
1 It is significant that Thayer should note this usage in Xenophon (An. 2, 5, 14) and Polybius (1, 9,7; 74, 13; 86, 5, etc.), while Clavis* does not.
2 P. Wendland, Deutsche Litteraturzeitung, 1895, col. 902, refers further to Schenkl’s Index to Epictetus, and to Viereck, Sermo graecus, p. T5.
N. 23] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 194
which is not to be interpreted as a Hebraism, is confirmed also by the later Papyri. For example, in the very compre- hensive account BU. 34 (date and place uncertain), the separate items of expenditure are very often introduced by els. Tas eis τὸν Mapwva ... . οἰκονομίας, PER.i.1 (Fayyim, 83-84 A.D.) is correctly translated by the editor as the en- dorsement of Maron’s account ; cf. PER. xvii. τ... (Fayyim, 124 A.D.) εἰς ἄλλον τινὰ γράφειν διαθήκην, to draw up a will in favour of any other person. Weaving aside the New Testa- ment passages, we find this εἰς elsewhere as well ; the usage is therefore no mere Egyptian idiom. Thus, in a list of donors to a religious collection, Perg. 554 (after 105 a.p.), the purpose of the various items of expenditure is expressed by ets,’ e.g., line 10, εἰς ταυροβόλιον. The abrupt εἰς in the expenses-list Perg. 553 K (reign of Trajan) may also be mentioned as an example. The author has found this εἰς in other Inscriptions as well.
ἐρωτάω.
Cremer ὃ, p. 415, says: ‘‘in New Testament Greek also request . . ... . — an application of the word which manifestly arose through the influence of the Hebr. Ow”. But, as against this, Winer-Lunemann, p. 30, had already made reference to some profane passages,” which Clavis,® p. 175, appropriates and extends—though with the accompanying remark, “‘ex wmitatione hebr. On, significatu ap. profanos rarissimo’”’. The author has already expressed his disagree- ment with the limitation of this really vulgar-Greek usage to the Bible? The Fayyaim Papyri yield new material : ἐρωτᾶν request occurs in BU. 509 (115 A.D.), 4231 (2nd cent. A.D.), 41721. (2nd-3rd cent. A.D.), 62415 (reign of Diocletian).
1 Frankel, p. 353. 2 Winer-Schmiedel, § 4, 2 a (p. 27), counts this usage among the ‘‘im-
perfect’ Hebraisms. It paid be better to abolish this term from Winer’s Grammar.
5. Below, p. 290f., with a reference to the examples of Wilamowitz-Moel- lendorfi in Guil. Schmidt, De Flavii Tosephi elocutione observationes criticae, Fleck. Jobb. Suppl. xx. (1894), p. 516.
196 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 24
To these should be added the adjuration-tablet of Adru- metum (probably belonging to the 2nd cent. A.D.), linesi. (See p. 276.)
\ SLL καθαρὸς avo τινος.
The erroneous idea that this construction (Acts 20 36 and in Old Testament passages) is a Hebraism, has been long refuted not only by passages from late-Greek writers, but even by Demosthenes, 5973.1. That the error, in spite of all, is still prevalent is shown by Clavis?, p. 217, “ex hebr. add. ἀπό τινος, ... . ap. nativos Graecos c. nudo gen.”. It will there- fore do no harm to supplement the extra-biblical examples by the following passages from the Fayyim Papyri: BU. 19714 (17 a.p.), 17712 (46-47 a.D.), 11211 (ca. 60 a.D.), 18425 (72 A.D.), PER. 1.16 (83-84 A.D.), BU. 5366 (reign of Domitian), 19319 (186 A.D.), 24024 (167-168 A.D.), PER. cexx.10 (1st or 2nd cent. A.D.), BU. 9413 (289 a.D.). In all these passages, which are distributed over a period of nearly three hundred years, we find the formula free of a money-debt. To these there may be added a still older example in the Inscription of Pergamus 25578. (early Roman period), ἀπὸ δὲ τάφου καὶ expop[as] . . . καθαροὶ ἔστωσαν.
Yj ὄνομα.
1. This word occurs in Acts 1", Rey. ὦ 11%. with the meaning of person. Clavis*, p. 312, explains this usage ex imitatione hebr. TN. But the hypothesis of a Hebraism 15. unnecessary ; the Papyri demonstrate the same usage, which, of course, sufficiently explains itself: BU. 1131 (148 A.D.) ἑκάστῳ ὀνόματι παρα(γενομένῳ), 26518 (Fayyim, 148 A.D.) [ἑκάστῳ ovo late mapax[ec|ras,? 531 1]. 9 « (Fayytim, 2nd
1The passage in Demosthenes had been cited by G. D. Kypke, Observa- tiones sacrae, Wratisl. 1755, ii., p. 109; after him by Winer for example (e.g., 471836], p. 183, 7[1867], p. 185, and Blass, Gramm., Ὁ. 104 [Eng. Trans., p. 106]. The author’s attention was called to Kypke by Wendt on Acts 2076 (Meyer, iii. ®/7 [1888], p. 444. The right view is advocated also by Cremer ὃ, p. 489.
2In regard to both of these passages, Professor Wilcken of Breslau observes, in a letter to the author, that ὄνομα is there used “ for the possessor
Ν. 25] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 197
sic 2 , \ “ ” EVOLKLA TT pos E€KAOTOV OVOLA
TOV τρυγώντων ypadyTa.*”, 388 1.16 (Fayyim, 2nd-3rd cent. A.D.) ταβέλλαι δύ[ο] ἐλευθερώσεων τοῦ αὐτοῦ ὀνόματος δια-
cent. A.D.) τὰ περιγεινόμενα
φόροις χρόνοις (cf. 11. 35 πῶς [ο]ὖν τοῦ Εὐκαίρου δύ[ο] ταβέλλαι ἐλευθερίας εὑ ρί]σ[ κον]ται ;).
2. To the authorities for the formula εἰς τὸ ὄνομά Twos, given on p. 146 ff. above, may be added BU. 2565 (Fayytim, reign of Antoninus Pius) ta ὑπάρχοντ[α] εἰς ὄνομα δυεῖν ὁ“, that which belongs to the name (i.e., property or means) of the two; here the form is used in the same way as in the expression (belonging to Asia Minor) κτηματώνης εἰς τὸ τοῦ θεοῦ ὄνομα, p. 147 above. For other examples see ThLZ. xxv. (1900), p. 73 f. The formula ἐπ᾽ ὀνόματος is similarly used in the Papyri—BU. 22615: (Fayytim, 99 A.D.) πάντων TOV ἐπ᾽ ὀνόματος τῆς μητρός μου... εἰς αὐτοὺς ὑπαρχόντων ;' further, BU. 2319 (Fayyfim, reign of Hadrian) should pos- sibly be restored thus: [ἐπ᾽ ovo]uatos τῆς θυγατρός σου."
3. On p. 147 above, the conjecture was made that the non- discovery hitherto of the phrase ποιεῖν Tu ἐν τῷ ὀνόματί τινος IN any extra-biblical source is to be attributed solely to chance. But the author has meanwhile met with it—not, indeed, in the construction with ἐν, but in the very similar one with the dative alone. The oath of fealty to the Emperor Cali- gula taken by the inhabitants of Assos in Troas (EHphemeris epigraphica, v. [1884], p. 156, 37 A.D.) is signed by 5 πρεσ- βευταί, after which group of names occur the concluding
of the name, the person,” but that the translation name answers quite well. —The present writer would, with Luther, render the word by name in the New Testament passages also, so that the special character of the usage might not be obliterated.
1 In Corpus Papyrorum Raineri, i. 1, 270, note, L. Mitteis translates this passage: alles Vermigen meiner Mutter ist in seinem Besitz [all the pro- perty of my mother is in his possession].
2A different case is 15327 (Fayyiim, 152 a.v.) ἀπογράψασθαι ἐν τῇ τῶν καμήλων ἀπογραφῇ . . . ἐπ᾽ ὀνόματος αὐτῶν. What we have here is the entering on the list of a camel wnder the name of its new owner. Still, that which is specified as ἐπ᾽ ὀνόματος of any one is, in point of fact, his property. One sees that here, as also in the above formule, there can be no thought of a new meaning of the word, but only of a realising of its pregnant fundamental meaning.
198 BIBLE STUDIES. [N 26.
words : οἵτινες καὶ ὑπὲρ τῆς Γαίου Καίσαρος Σεβαστοῦ Γερ- lal Le > ΄ \ K / sic ἔθ an al μανικοῦ σωτηρίας εὐξάμενοι Avi Καπιτωλίῳ ““ ἔθυσαν τῷ τῆς πόλεως ὀνόματι. Here we have most likely the same usage as in James 5” A ἐλάλησαν τῷ ὀνόματι Kvpiov;' and the hypothesis of Cremer ὃ, p. 712, viz., that ‘it was Christianity which first introduced the use of the phrase ‘in the name of, etc.,, into occidental languages” should thus be rejected.
2. SO-CALLED ‘‘ JEWISH-GREEK’”’ ‘‘ BIBLICAL”’ oR ‘‘ NEW TESTAMENT ἡ WORDS AND CONSTRUCTIONS.
The articles which follow should make it clear that the non-occurrence in extra-biblical literature of many biblical words is a matter solely of statistical contingency. (In some cases the question, moreover, is not one of non-occurrence at all, but merely of non-notification.) Many of this particular class of words have been already noticed in the second treatise of this work. The author observes, further, that reference is made by Blass, Grammatik des Neutest. Griechisch, Ὁ. X11. [see Eng. Trans., p. 127, note], to ἔναντι in Inscriptions ; p.° 69 [Eng. Trans., p. 68], to φιλωπρωτεύω in an Inscription, and p. 68 [Eng. Trans., p. 68] to φρεναπάτης in a Papyrus. The number of ‘‘ biblical”? or ‘‘New Testament” words will certainly still further melt away—and without prejudice to the distinctive inner character of biblical ideas.
ἀγάπη.
In the German edition of Bibelstudien (Marburg, 1895), p. 80, there was cited, in reference to ἀγάπη, the Paris Papyrus 49 (between 164 and 158 B.c.), in which citation the author adopted the reading of the French editor (1865). Subsequently, Blass, in his critique,” questioned the accuracy of this reading, and, in virtue of the facsimile, proposed ταραχήν instead of ἀγάπην. The facsimile is not a photo- graphic one; the author considered that ἀγάπην was, at least, not impossible. Blass, however, is most probably right. A re-examination of the passage in the original, as
1 But not in Mark 9*8 A and Matt. 722, where the dative is instrumental. 2 ThLZ. xx. (1895), p. 488.
Ν. 27] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 199
has been kindly communicated to us by M. Pierret, the Conservator of Egyptian Antiquities in the Louvre, has had the result ‘‘qu’on ne trouve, dans le papyrus No 49, aucune trace du mot ἀγάπην, mais seulement a la ligne 6 la vraisemblance dune lecture tapaynv’’. The author, therefore, has no hesi- tation in here withdrawing his reference to this Papyrus.! [The note in question has, of course, been omitted in this translation. |
Nevertheless, this does not imply the removal of the doubt as to whether the word is a specifically ‘‘ biblical” one, and the conjecture that it was used in Egypt can now be confirmed. Only, one does not need to go to Paris in order to find the word. The statements of v. Zezschwitz,? Clavis* and Cremer ὁ notwithstanding, it is found in Philo, to which fact, so far as the present writer is aware, Thayer alone has called attention in his lexicon.’ In Quod Deus wmmut. ὃ 14 (M., p. 283), it is said: παρ᾽ 6 μοι δοκεῖ τοῖς προειρημένοις δυσὶ κεφαλαίοις, To τε “ ὡς ἄνθρωπος ᾿ καὶ TO “οὐχ ὡς ἄνθρωπος ὁ Geos, ° ἕτερα δύο συνυφῆναι ἀκόλουθα καὶ συγγενῆ, φόβον τε καὶ ἀγάπην. Here then we have ἀγάπη, and in such manner as to repel the supposition that Philo adopted the word from the LXX. Further, ἀγώπη is here used already in its religious-ethical sense, for the connection shows that the reference is to love to God, the antithesis of which is fear of God (cf., in the next sentence, ἢ πρὸς τὸ ἀγαπᾶν ἢ πρὸς TO φοβεῖσθαι τὸν ὄντα. The analogy to 1 John 4 1815 quite apparent.
1 Cf. W. M. Ramsay, The Expository Times, vol. ix., p. 567 f.
2 Profangraecitaet und biblischer Sprachgeist, Leipzig, 1859, p. 62: “᾿Αγάπη does not occur as a genuine term, so far as the references in the Lexica avail, in the κοινή either’”’.
3 Clavis®, p. 3: ‘‘ In Philone et Josepho legi non memini”’ (after Bret- schneider).
4 Cremer 8, Ὁ. 14, ‘‘ this word, apparently formed by the LXX, or, at any rate, in their circle (Philo and Josephus do not have it) .....”.
ὃ The present writer had not the book by him when he wrote the article ἀγάπη in the German Bibelsiudien.
ὁ The passage relates to the apparent contradiction between LXX Deut. 13! and Numb. 28 19,
200 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 28
For the sake of completeness it may be permitted to notify still another passage, which, however, does not afford an altogether certain contribution to the answering of our question either way. In a scholion to Thue. 11. 51, 5, we find φιλανθρωπίας καὶ ἀγάπης as a gloss to ἀρετῆς (ed. Poppo, ii. 2, p. 92, or A. Schoene [1874], p. 20925). Our opinion of the gloss will depend upon our answer to the question whether the glossator was a Christian or not. But no certain answer to this question can be given. In the present state of scholiastic research it is impossible to speak definitely about the age of any particular scholium or of any philological term in the scholia. Still, the sort of gloss which savours of interlinear explanation, and which explains only by remodelling the expression, has always against it (in the opinion of Professor G. Wissowa of Halle, who has most willingly furnished us with this information) the disadvantage of late age.
ἀκατάγνωστος.
Hitherto authenticated only in 2 Macc. 4“, Tit. 2 ὃ and in ecclesiastical writers. Clavis*, p. 14, is content to confirm this state of the matter; Cremer‘, p. 245, isolates the word thus: ‘‘only in biblical and ecclesiastical Greek”. The formation and meaning of the word, however, support the hypothesis that we have to reckon here with a matter of statistical chance. In point of fact, the word occurs in the epitaph CIG. 1971 bs (Thessalonica, 165 A.D.), applied to the deceased; also in the poetical epitaph in the Capitoline Museum at Rome JGrSI.1 2139s (date ?), applied to the deceased (ἄμεμπτος, ἀκατάγνωστος) 3; finally, also in a deed of tenure, which certainly belongs to the Christian period, but which can hardly be deemed a memorial of ‘‘ ecclesi-
1 Inscriptiones Graecae Siciliae et Italiae additis Graecis Galliae Hts- ' paniae Britanniae Germaniae inscriptionibus consilio et auctoritate Academiae Litterarum Regiae Borussicae edidit Georgivs Kaibel, . . . Berolimi 1890.
2 Kaibel, Hpigrammata Graeca ex lapidibus conlecta, Berlin, 1878, p. 295 f., treats the Inscription under No. 728 as a Christian one, but without giving his reasons.
N. 29] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 201
astical’’ Greek in Cremer’s sense: BU. 8085 (Fayyim, Byzant. period) ἐπάναγκες ἐπιτελέσωμεν τὰ πρὸς τὴν καλλιερ- γίαν τῶν ἀρουρῶν ἔργα πάντα ἀκαταγνώσπ[ ως ].}
5 4 εαν.
1. A. Βανίχηϑηῃ 3 observes in reference to ἐών with the indicative*: ‘‘ It cannot be denied, indeed, that the examples of this construction are almost as nothing compared with the mass of those which are grammatically regular, whatever doubts may be raised by the fact that hardly a single quite trustworthy passage with the indicative has come down to us”. But he is right, with regard to those passages in which both the indicative and the subjunctive appear in the text, in attributing the latter to the copyists. Only a very few absolutely certain examples, belonging to a relatively early period, can be pointed out. The following have been noticed by the author in Papyri: BU. 3005 (Fayyam, 148 a.D.) κἂν δέον ἦν, 4813 (Fayyam, 2nd-3rd cent. A.D.) ἐὰν δὲ μὴ ἐνῆν"; in each case the form is properly a perfect.6 Further, with the present or future indicative following, we have the Paris Papyrus 18 (imperial period ?),’ in the middle, ἐὰν μαχουσιν μετ᾽ ἐσοῦ οἱ ἀδελφοί σου, according as we accentuate μάχουσιν or payotow*®; BU. 5976 (Fayyim, 75 A.D.) καὶ ἐὰν εἰπόσει,"
1 30 the editor, Wilcken, restores; the author considers that ἀκατά- "γνωστί[οι] is also possible.
2 Grammatik des neutestamentlichen Sprachgebrauchs, Berlin, 1859, p. 192.
3 Strictly speaking, this point is out of place in the above paragraph, but it is discussed here in order to avoid breaking up the article ἐάν.
4 The editor’s proposal to change ἣν into 77 seems to the present writer ‘wrong. Cf. also the passage BU. 543, quoted below.
5 ἐάν with the subjunctive is found three times (lines 4.12. 17) in the same Papyrus.
ὃ Winer-Liinemann, p. 277, β at the foot.
7 Notices et extraits des manuscrits de la bibliothéque vmpérrale, vol. xviii., part 2, Paris, 1865, p. 232 f.
8 For udxw cf. the analogous cases in Winer-Liinemann, top of p. 244.
9. This peculiar form (developed from εἶπον ?) must in any case be inter- preted as indicative.
202 BIBLE STUDIES. [Ν. 30
cf. 607 2 (Fayytim, 163 A.D.) ὁπόταν ' ἀναιρὶ οἸῦνται and the passages cited below, 86 19, 22.
2. Winer-Liinemann, p. 291, writes as follows, in refer- ence to the frequent ἐάν instead of ἄν in relative clauses ; “Τὴ the text of the N. T. (as in the LXX and the Apocrypha
., now and then in the Byzantine writers, . . .), av after relatives is frequently displaced, according to most authorities and the best, by ἐών [here the passages are given], as not seldom in the Codices of Greek, even of Attic, writers. Modern philologists . . . substitute av throughout.
The editors of the N. T. have not as yet ventured to do this, and in point of fact ἐάν for ἀν may well have been a peculiarity of the popular language in later (if not, indeed, in earlier) times.” A. Buttmann, p. 63 f., 1s of a lke opinion : ‘“We may at least infer with certainty, from the frequent occurrence of this substitution, that this form, certainly in- correct (but still not quite groundless), was extant among later writers’’. Schmiedel® also recognises this ἐών as late- Greek. But even in 1888 Grimm, Clavis,® p. 112, had ex- plained it ‘‘ex usw ap. profanos maxime dubio”’. The case is extremely instructive in regard to the fundamental question as to the character of the language of the Greek Bible. That this small formal pecuharity, occurring abundantly * in the Greek Bible, should be, as is said, very doubtful among ‘“‘profane’’ writers, is conceivable only on the view that ‘biblical Greek ’’ constitutes a philological-historical mag- nitude by itself. If, however, we take the philological phenomena of the Bible out of the charmed circle of the
1 ὁπόταν and ὅταν with the future indicative in the Sibyllists are treated of by A. Raach, Zur Kritik der Sibyllinischen Orakel, Philologus, 1111. (1894),. p. 283.
2 HC. ii. 1 (1891), p. 98, ad loc. 1 Cor. 655:
Τὴ the LXX in innumerable passages (H. W. J. Thiersch, De Penta- teuchi versione Alexandrina libri tres, Erlangen, 1841, p. 108) ; in the Apocry- pha, Ch. A. Wahl, Clavis librorwm V. T. Apocryphorwm philologica, Leip- zig, 1853, p. 137 f., enumerates 28 cases ; in the N.T. Clavis® gives 17. Many other cases, without doubt, have been suppressed by copyists or editors.— 17. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorfi considers ὃ ἐάν, 3 John®, to be an ‘ ortho- graphic blunder ” (Hermes, xxxiii. [1898], p. 531), but this is a mistake.
Ν. 31] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 203
dogina of “ biblical Greek,’’ we may then characterise the possible non-occurrence of ‘‘ profane” examples of the present phenomenon as, at most, a matter of accident. But the Papyri prove that the biblical éav—so far at least as regards New Testament times '—was in very frequent use in Egypt; they confirm in the most marvellous way the conjecture of Winer and A. Buttmann. The New Testament is, in this matter, virtually surrounded by a cloud of witnesses: the author has no doubt that the Ptolemaic Papyri” and the Inscriptions yield further material, which would similarly substantiate the ἐάν of the LXX and the Apocrypha. On account of the representative importance of the matter, a number of passages from the Papyri* may be noted here, which furnish, so to speak, the linguistic-historical frame- work for the New Testament passages: BU. 5435 (Hawarah, 27 B.C.) ἢ ὅσων ἐὰν ἣν, PER. cexxiv.io (Fayytim, 5th-6th cent. A.D.) ἡ ὅσων ἐμὰν ὁ ἢ, BU. 19710 (F., 17 A.D.) ἡ ὅσων ἐὰν aip[ Aras], ibid.i9 οἷς ἐὰν αἱρῆται, 1777 (Ε΄, 46-47 Α.}.) ἢ ὅσων ἐὰν ὦσιν, PER. iv.u (F., 52-53 A.D.) ἢ ὅσων ἐὰν oor, ibid. 23 ὡς ἐὰν βούληται, BU. 2516 (F., 81 Α.}.) [ἀ]φ᾽ ἧ[ς ἐ]ὰν [ἀπ͵]αιτήσει ““, PER. 1.19 (F., 83-84 A.D.) ὡς ἐὰν [βούλω]νται, ibid.2 ἢ ὅσαι ἐὰν ὦσι, BU. 1885 (F., 85 A.D.) ἀφ᾽ ἧς ἐὰν ἀπαιτηθῇ. ibid.19 ὅσα ποτὲ ἐὰν καταλείψη “5, ibid.25 οἷς ἐὰν βούληται, 2606 (F., 90 A.D.) ὁπόδε “ ἐὰν αἱρῇ, 2529 (F., 98 A.D.) ἀφ᾽ ἧς [ἐὰ]ν ἀπα[ι]τ[η]θῆ, 538s (F., 100 A.D.) ἢ ὅσων ἐὰν ὦσι, PER. clxxxviil.2 (F., 105-106 A.D.) ὡς ἐὰν αἱρῶνται, ibid. 1 ἢ [ὅσα], ἐὰν ὦσι, xi.26(F., 108 A.D.) a[s] ἐὰν αἱρῆται,
1 Τῦ is only the Papyri of the (early and late) imperial period which have been collated by the author in regard to this question.
2 This conjecture is confirmed by a Papyrus in the British Museum, from the Thebaid, belonging to the year 132 a.p.; given in Grenfell’s An Alexandrian Erotic Fragment and other Greek Papyri chiefly Ptolemaic, Ox- ford, 1896, No. xviii. 27, Ὁ. 40: καὶ ἐξ οὗ ἐὰν αἱρῆται.
5 In almost every case the editors of the Berlin and the Vienna Papyri prefer to read ἄν instead of ἐάν, but what we have to do with here is not really a clerical error. ἐάν should be read in every case, just as it is written. In Vol. 11. of the Berlin documents, ἐάν has for the most part been allowed to remain, and rightly so.
4 Pap.: n. Wessely, p. 255, accentuates ἢ %¢.
204 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 32
xxviii.7 (F., 110 A.D.) ofa ἐὰν éyBn*, ibid.14 ἢ ὅσων ἐὰν ὦσι, BU. 1019 (F., 114 a.p.) ἐξ οὗ ἐὰν αἱρῇ μέρους, ibid.is ἐφ᾽ ὃν ἐὰν... χρόνον, 444τ (reign of Trajan) ἢ ὅσηι “ὁ ἐὰν ἢ, 1134 (143 A.D.) πρὸς ἃς ἐὰν μεταξὺ ἀγάγωσι, 38001 (F., 148 A.D.) ois ἐὰν πρὸς ταῦτα ἐπιτελέσῃ, 867.13 (F., 155 A.D.) ὧν ἐὰν καταλείψη *, ibid. το μέχρι ἐὰν... γένονται] ἧς, ibid. 22 ὁπ[6]7τε ἐὰν. . . γένονται “ὁ, 80 [= 4467... (F., 158-159 A.D.) ὁπότε €a[v αἱρῆται], ibid.21 ὁπότε aiav* αἱρ[ἢ], 54213 (F., 165 a.D.) ὃ ἐὰν αἱρῆται, 28228 (F., after 175 A.D.) ἢ ὅσοι ἐὰν ὦσι, ibid. 36 ὡς ἐὰν αἱρῆται, 24125 (F., 177 A.D.) [ἢ ὅσαι) ἐὰν ὦσι, ibid, 28 ἢ ὅσαι [ἐὰν ὦσι, ibid. 35 @[s ἐ]ὰν αἱρῆται, 326 1. 10 (F., 189 A.D.) el τι ἐὰν ἀν θ)ἠρώπιν[ ον] ma[On], ibid. 11.5 εἰ Te ἐὰν ἐγὼ. .. καταλίπω, 432 11. 29 (190 A.D.) ὅ,τε ἐὰν πράξης, 4617 (F., 193 A.D.) ἐν ois ἐὰν βούλωμαι τόποις, 23315 (F., 2nd cent. A.D.) ὅ,τι ἐὰν αἱρ[ὥνται], 2364 (F., 2nd cent. A.D.) ἢ ὅσων ἐὰν ὦσι, 24819 (F., 2nd cent. A.D.) ὡς ἐὰν δοκιμάξῃς, 3316 (F., 2nd-3rd cent. A.D.) ὅπου ἐὰν θέλῃς, ibid.21 ἢ διὰ οἵου ἐὰν εὕρης, 13 10 (F'., 289 A.D.) ὡς ἐὰν αἱρῇ, 3801s (F., 3rd cent. A.D.) μετὰ οὗ ἐὰν εὕρω, PER. xix.23 (F., 330 A.D.) ὧν ἐὰν... προσφωνήσῃ, BU, 36410 (F., 553 A.D.) ὅσων ἐὰν ὦσιν, 30812 (F., 586 A.D.) ὅσως ἐὰν ὦσιν, ibid, verso τι ὅσων [ἐ]ὰν ὦσι.
Surveying this long list, one is struck by the fact that ἐάν is used in many constantly recurring formule, but, nevertheless, in spontaneously-formed clauses as well. We should also notice that the documents in which it occurs
1 Proceeding from this twice-occurring εἰ with (ἐάν = ) ay following, we can understand the peculiar negative εἰ μή τι ἄν in 1 Cor. 75. Schmiedel, ΗΟ. ii. 1 (1891), p. 100, explains thus: “εἰ μή τι ἄν = ἐὰν μή τι, as Origen reads’’. This equation ought not to be made; it only explains the meaning of the combination, but not its special syntactic character. εἰ μή τι ἄν has philologically nothing to do with the ἐάν in ἐὰν μή τι; ἄν, occurring here after ei, is rather exactly the same as if it occurred after a hypothetical relative, thus: unless im a gwen case, unless perhaps. The fact that the verb (say, ἀποστερῆτε ΟΥ̓ γένηται) has to be supplied is absolutely without importance for the grammatical determination of the case.—Blass, Gramm., p. 211 [Kng. Trans., p. 216], counts ef μή τι ἄν among the combinations in which εἰ and ἐάν are blended together. We consider this hypothesis untenable, on account of the ἄν. A. Buttmann, p. 190, note, agrees with it, though indeed he also refers to the explanation which we consider to be the correct one, pp. 189,
bottom line, and 190, first two lines. It is confirmed by the ei ἄν of the Papyrus.
N. 33] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 205
are of very various kinds, and are not merely official papers, with regard to which we might always be justified in sup- posing that what we had there was only a peculiarity of the official language. The first and second centuries A.D. consti- tute its definite classical period ; it seems to become less frequent later. The author has met with the ‘ correct” ἄν only in the following passages: BU. 372, 11.17 (Fayytm, 154 A.D.) Ἐξ ob} adv... mporeOy, 6197 (F., 155 A.D.) ἄχρι ἂν ἐξετασθῇ, 3485 (F., 156 A.D.) ὡς ἂν δοκειμάσῃς “5, ibid.7, ὡς ἂν δύνοι ἧς, 4191 (F., 276-277 A.D.) ἄχρις ἂν παραγένωμαιυ, 3162 (Askalon in Phoenicia, 359 A.D.) ὃν ἂν αἱρῆτε "'ς τρόπον, ibid. 2.32 καὶ ὅσον av... . Stadépn, 3 ὧν ay. . ἐπικτή- on{te*’; he does not of course guarantee that this is an exhaustive list. The hypothesis that ἐάν for ἄν is an Alex- andrianism, in support of which the repeated ἄν of the last- mentioned document from Askalon might be put forward, seems to the present writer to be groundless. We must deal very circumspectly with all such tendencies to isolate. We actually find ὅσοι ἐὰν συνζευχθῶσιν twice on a leaden tablet from Carthage (imperial period), CIZ. vill. suppl. 12511.
Blass also refers to the use of ἐάν for av in the Papyri,. Gramm., p. 61 [Eng. Trans., p. 61], where he cites BU. 12, 18, 33, 46, “etc.” ; and also p. 212 [Eng. Trans., p. 217], where he cites the London Aristotelian Papyrus (end of Ist cent. A.D.).
εἶ (εἰ ?) μήν.
εἶ μήν occurs on good authority in Heb. 6" (as already Ἴν ΠΕΣ egy Misek, de. 34° 50°, 90°, 30%, Numb. 147. Job. 273, Judith 1”, Baruch 27°) as used to express an oath. EF. Bleek, ad loc.,1 has gone into the matter most thoroughly; he concludes his investigation as follows: ‘‘These examples [1.6., from the LXX] prove that εἰ μήν in the present passage also was, for the Alexandrian Jews, no meaningless form, as Tholuck describes it; and this case may serve to convince us how much we must be on our guard
1 Der Brief an die Hebréer erldutert, part 2, Berlin, 1840, pp. 248-250..
206 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 34
against the temptation to reject forthwith a reading which is vouched for by the agreement of the oldest authorities of various classes and from various localities, on the alleged ground of its meaninglessness, and without more strict in- quiry as to whether it may not be established or defended by biblical usage’. This ‘‘biblical’’ usage, according to him, arises from ‘‘a blending together of the Greek form of oath ἢ μὴν with the wholly un-Greek εἰ μὴ, which originates in a literal imitation of the Hebrew form ” (top of p. 250). Clavis*®, p. 118, and Winer-Schmiedel, ὃ 5, 15 (p. 46), still consider this blending as possible, unless, perhaps, it be a case of itacistic confusion of 7 with e, and ἢ μήν be intended. But O. Β΄. Fritzsche,' again, asserts this latter supposition to be the only admissible one, and finds in the opinion of Bleek an example of ‘‘ how easily the obstinate adherence to the letter of the traditional text leads to con- fusion and phantasy ”’.
The whole matter is exceedingly instructive. How plausible does an assertion like Bleek’s, accepted from him by so many others, seem to an adherent of the notion of ‘‘ biblical’ Greek! On the one hand the Greek ἢ μήν, on the other the Hebrew 85 ON = εἰ u»—by blending the two the genius of the biblical diction constructs an εὐ μήν! True, it might have made an ἢ μή from them, but it did not—it preferred εἰ μήν. Pity, that this fine idea should be put out of existence by the Papyri.” BU. 54828 (Hawarah, 28-27 B.C.) runs: ὄμνυμι Καίσαρα Adtoxpatopa θεοῦ υἱὸν εἶ μὴν παραχωρήσειν ... Tov .. κλῆρον), and we read, in PER. ccxxiv.it. (Soknopaiu Nesos in the Fayytm, 5-6 a.p.): ouvuosic[ . . Καίσαρα] Αὐτοκράτορα θεοῦ υ[ἱὸν] ......... εἶ μὴν ἐνμένειν ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς γεγενημένοις κατὰ τὴ]ν γραφὴν .... Here, in two mutually independent cases, we have εἶ
1 HApAT. ii. (1853), p. 138; ef. i. (1851), p. 186.
2 Further, the hypothesis of blending, considered purely by itself, is inconceivable. If εἰ μήν is a Hebraising form, as regards one half of it, then εἰ must have the sense of ON, But then also the formula takes on
a negative sense, so that, e.g., Hebr. 6 13 would read: Truly of I bless thee and multiply thee—[scil.: then will I not be God, or something similar].
N. 35] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 207
(εἰ ?) μήν as a form of oath—on Papyrus leaves which are some hundred years older than the original text of Hebrews, and which come from the same country in which the LXX and, most probably, the Epistle to the Hebrews, were written. Whatever, then, may be its relation to this εἶ (εἰ 9) μήν, thus much, at all events, is clear: it is no specific phenomenon of biblical or of Jewish! Greek. It 15 either a case of mere itacistic confusion of ἡ with e,? as Fritzsche assumes in regard to the biblical, Krebs* and Wessely * in regard to the Papyrus passages ; or else the expression is a peculiar form of oath, only authenticated as regards Egypt, about the origin of which the author does not venture to express an opinion. The abundant and excellent evidence in biblical MSS. for the εὖ in this particular combination,? and its occurrence, in the same combination, in two mutually independent Papyrus passages, deserve in any case our fullest consideration. Blass, too, has not failed to notice the εἶ μήν, at least of the first passage, BU. 545: he writes thus, Gramm., p. 9 [Eng. Trans., p. 9]: “Εἶ μήν for ἣ μήν, Heb. 61 (gABD?), is also attested by the LXX and Papyri [Note 4, to this word, is a reference to BU. 543, and to Blass, Ausspr. d. Gr.?, pp. 33, 77]; all this, moreover, properly belongs to orthoepy, and not to orthography’. Then on p. 60 [Eng. Trans., p. 60]: ““ἢ, more correctly εἶ, in εἶ μήν,᾽᾽ and p. 254 [Eng. Trans., p. 260]: ‘‘ Asseverative sentences, direct and indirect (the latter infinitive sentences) are, in Classical Greek, intro-
1 That the author of either Papyrus was a Jew is impossible.
2 Thus, e.g., in the Berlin MS., immediately before, we have, conversely, xpnwv for χρειων. (The document is otherwise well-written, like that of Vienna). Cf. also BU. 31612 (Askalon, 359 a.p.) εἰ [=] καὶ εἴ τινι ἑτέρῳ ὀνόματι καλῖτε, and, conversely, 26113 (Fayyim, 2nd-3rd cent. a.p.) ἡ μή, with- out doubt for εἰ μή.
3 Krebs writes ef in the Berlin MS., and adds the note: “J. [1.6., read]
’
4 Wessely writes e.* μην, and adds “1. [ = read] ἢ unv’”’.
>The note on p. 416 of the Htymologicum magnum, viz., 7° ἐπίῤῥημα δρκικόν - ὅπερ καὶ διὰ διφθόγγου γράφεται, has in itself no weight; it but re- peats the documentary information found in the passage quoted in connection with it, Hebr. 64 = Gen. 221".
208 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 36
duced by ἦ μήν, for which, in Hellenistic-Roman times, we find εἰ (accent Ὁ) μήν written; so LXX and consequently Heb. 6%”. The author cannot rightly judge from this as to the opinion of Blass concerning the spelling and the origin of the formula: in any case it is evident from the last-quoted observation that he does not consider the accentuation εἶ, which he seems to uphold, to be wholly free from doubt.
The above-quoted work of Blass, Uber die Aussprache des Griechischen*, Berlin, 1888, p. 33, shows that this formula of swearing is used also in the Doric Mystery-Inscription of Andania in the Peloponnesus (93 or 91 B.c.); the ὅρκος γυναικονόμου begins, in line 27, εἶ μὰν ἕξειν ἐπιμέλειαν περί τε τοῦ εἱματισμοῦ (Dittenberger, Sylloge, No. 388, p. 570). Blass observes regarding this: “ΕἾ wav seems, nevertheless, rather to be a jusswm speciale of the language than to rest upon general rules ”’.
ἐλαιών.
This word is undoubtedly found in Acts 1 152, ἀπὸ ὄρους τοῦ καλουμένου ἐλαιῶνος ; according to Clavis*®, elsewhere only in the LXX and Josephus: ‘“‘ apud Graecos non exstat”. A matter of statistical chance: in the Berlin Papyri, vol. 1., alone, ἐλαιών, olive-grove or olive-garden, occurs in nine different documents, of which BU. 375 (51 a.p.), 506 (115 A.D.) are of “New Testament” times; there may be added from vol. 11., BU. 3791214 (67 A.D.), 59510 (perhaps 70-80 A.D.). The Papyri named are all from the Fayyim. The formation of the word is correctly given in Clavis,?1 but it is a misleading half-truth to say: terminatio ὧν est nominum derivatorum windicantium locum ws arboribus consitum, quae nomine primitivo designantur. The termination -ὧν is used, quite generally, and not only in regard to the names of trees, to form words which designate the place where the particu- lar objects are found. Equally strange is the identification with which Grimm supplements the above: olivetwm, locus oleis consitus, 1.6. [!] mons olearum. Asif an ἐλαιών could not
1A. Buttmann, p. 20, refers to the similarly-formed Greek names of mountains (Κιθαιρών, Ἑλικών, etc.).
Ν. 37] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 209
just as well be in a valley or anywhere else. ἐλαιών does not, of course, mean ‘‘ Olive-Mount”’ in Acts 1” either, but “‘place of olives” or, if one prefers, ‘‘ olive-wood’’.! The word is, doubtless, used here as a place-name ; but when a particular mountain has the name ἐλαιών, it cannot be in- ferred therefrom that the lexicographer has a right to render ἐλαιών by “mons ”’ olearum. ‘To do so would be quite as pre- posterous as to translate λεγιών, in Mark 5°, etc., by legion of demons.
The circumstance that the word has been but scantily authenticated hitherto must have had a share in sometimes keeping it from its rights in another respect. Luke 19” reads, according to universal testimony, πρὸς τὸ ὄρος τὸ καλούμενον ἐλαιων ; similarly 21°", εἰς τὸ ὄρος TO καλούμενον ἔλαιων, and,” in Mark 111, the Vaticanus reads πρὸς τὸ ὄρος τὸ ἐλαίων, the Bobbiensis, ad montem eleon; in Luke 22° A Sangallensis has εἰς τὸ ὄρος ἐλαίων. In the two first-named passages, ἐλαίων was formerly taken as the genitive plural of é\ata—probably universally, and accentu- ated ἐλαιῶν. Schmiedel?® still considers this view possible, and, in point of fact, the abbreviated form of speech which we must in such case admit would not be without analogy : in BU, 22710 (Fayyam, 151 a.p.) the author finds ἐν τόπ(ῳ) Καινῆς Διώρυγος λεγο[ μένῳ] ; similarly in 2822 (Fayydim, after 175 A.D.), ἐν τόπῳ Οἰκίας Καννί. λ]εγομένου “5, and in
1 The author is not quite able to determine whether the mistake in pro- cedure which underlies the above-named identification should be attributed to W. Grimm, or whether it is a result of the erroneous view of Chr. G. Wilke. In any case we may characterise the mistake in the pertinent words of the latter (Die Hermeneutik des Neuen Testaments systematisch dargestellt, zweiter Theil: die hermeneutische Methodenlehre, Leipzig, 1844, p. 181): “ Hxegetes are frequently in the habit of giving to this or the other word a meaning which belongs only to some word which is combined with it, and which does not apply to the word in question, either in this combination or elsewhere”’,
2 The passages which follow, so far as the author knows, have in no case been previously noticed.
5. Winer-Schmiedel, § 10, 4 (p. 93); the author perceives here that also Niese and Bekker always write ἐλαιῶν in Josephus. The relevant passages are cited in Clavis?, p. 140.
14
210 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 38
line 21,, ἐν τόπῳ Oixias! Zal .... .JrAoy [Aeyo]uévou™ ; PER. xxxviil. 9 (F., 263 A.D.) ἐν τόπῳ Ψιβιστάνεως λεγομί(ένῳ). Nevertheless the case is a somewhat different one in the Papyrus passages; the author would only bring the above forward in case of extreme necessity. But such a case would only exist if é\arwy were necessarily a genitive. Now, since we may without misgiving accentuate ἐλαιών “, the question alone remains whether this form, which is urged upon us by Acts 115, and which is ἃ priori more probable than ἐλαιῶν without the article (which never occurs in Luke), is gram- matically tenable. And the answer must unquestionably be in the affirmative. Not, mdeed, as A. Buttmann, p. 20, thinks, because the word is to be ‘treated altogether as an indeclinabile, and therefore as a neuter,’ * but by reference to the more lax usage of later Greek,’ our knowledge of which is enlarged by the Papyri. In these the formule, o καλούμενος, ἐπικαλούμενος, ETLKEKAHMEVOS, λεγόμενος, for intro- ducing the names of persons and places, are extremely frequent. As a rule these words are construed with the proper case; thus, in Vol. I. alone of the Berlin Documents, we find some thirty examples of the years 121-586 a.p. But in several passages from the Fayytiim Papyri, we may note the more lax usage as well: in BU. 52615 +. (86 A.D.) ἐν τῇ Tero Bais λε[ γομ]ένης “ὁ, and 2356 (137 a.p.) Π[α]σ[ Πων[ος] Αφροδισίου ἐπικ(αλουμένου) Κέννις, Τεσσβῶβις and Κέννις will be nominatives; in 277 i.2 (2nd. cent. A.D.) we find ἐν ἐποικίῳ ᾿Αμύντας, even without a participle, and in 849 τι. (313 A.D.) there occurs ἐν κλήρῳ καλουμένου * ᾿Αφρικιανός. Thus hardly any further objections can be made to the accentuation ἐλαιών in Luke 19” and 21°; it should also be applied in Mark 111 B and Luke 2239 4. Another question
1 The editor, Krebs, writes οἰκίας, but the word most likely belongs to the name of the field, and should thus, according to our custom, be written with a capital. The two names, in the author’s opinion, should be set in the Index sub Οἰκίας Κανν[.] and Oikias Sal ..... JAox.
2 The later editors accentuate thus.
* This could be asserted only of the reading in Mark 11! according to B.
* Winer-Schmiedel, ὃ 10, 4 (p. 93), and Winer’, § 29, 1 (p. 171).
Ν. 39] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 9711
which appears to the author to deserve a more exact investi- gation, can only be slightly touched upon here, viz., Which Greek reading for the name of the Mount of Olives is implied by the Vulgate? In Matthew, according to our texts, the Mount of Olives is always (211, 243, 26 33) called τὸ ὄρος τῶν ἐλαιῶν, in the corresponding passages in the Vulgate mons olwveti; similarly (except in Luke 19 39, 21* and Acts 1”, passages which on account of ἐλαιών require no explanation) in Luke 19* and John 8!, where also mons oliveti corresponds to the ὄρος τῶν ἐλαιῶν. The matter would have no further importance if the Mount of Olives were always designated thus in the Vulgate. But in Mark always (111, 13%, 14%) and Luke 22 39, asin Zech. 144, τὸ ὄρος τῶν ἐλαιῶν 15 rendered by mons olivarum.! Does this state of the case not prompt the conjecture that the Vulgate somehow implies éAav@v in the first-mentioned passages? How is the Mount of Olives named in the other ancient versions ?”
Blass, in his Grammar of New Testament Greek, several times expresses himself with regard to the question in a manner that evokes the present writer’s strongest opposition. On p. 32[ Eng. Trans., p. 32] he says: ““᾿Ελαιών, olive-mountain, as a Greek translation, cannot be indeclinable; hence, like the τὸ ὄρος τῶν ἐλαιῶν elsewhere, so ὄρος (acc.) TO καλού- μενον ἐλαιῶν (not ᾿Ελαιών) in Luke 19”, 21°"; in Acts 1”, all MSS., ὄρους τοῦ καλουμένου Ελαιῶνος, it 18 wrongly inflected for ἐλαιῶν; of. ὃ 33,1”. In § 33,1 (p. 84) [Eng. Trans., p. 84f.], again, we read: ‘‘When names are intro- duced without regard to the construction they seem some- times to be put in the nominative case, instead of the case which the construction would require. ..... But otherwise they are always made to agree incase. .... Accordingly, it is incredible that the Mt. of Olives should be translated ὁ ᾿Ελαιών and that this word should be used as an indeclinable in Luke 19”, 21° ὄρος (acc.) τὸ καλούμενον ἐλαιών, but we
1 Tischendorf’s Apparatus ignores the whole matter.
2 Specially the Peschito must be taken into consideration ; cf. Winer, p. 171. So far as the author can decide, it implies éAadéy in all the passages in Luke. But he cannot guarantee this.
212 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 39, 40
must read ἐλαιῶν (τὸ ὄρος τῶν ἐλ. in Luke 19 57 and else- where), and, in the single passage Acts 1 15 (ὄρους τοῦ καλου- μένου) ἐλαιῶνος, We must correct to ἐλαιῶν (as also in Josephus, A. 7, 9 2). But, in the first place, the nominative does not merely ‘‘seem”’ to be used sometimes in a more lax way: it actually 7s sometimes so used: to the already well- known biblical and extra-biblical passages there are to be added the above-quoted examples from the Papyri. ‘“‘ But otherwise they are always made to agree in case,”—without doubt! For that more lax usage of the nominative is of course an exception. But it cannot be doubted that the exception is possible. Hence it does not seem particularly convincing that Blass should base upon his ‘ otherwise always” the opinion: ‘‘ Accordingly it is incredible that the Mt. of Olives should be translated ὁ ᾿Ελαιών, and that this word should be used as an indeclinable”. This sentence, moreover, contains at the same time a slight but important displacement of the problem. We have no concern what- ever with the question whether ἐλαινών is used, in the passages quoted, as an indeclinable word (cf. Blass, p. 32 “indecl.’’), but only with the question whether, according to more lax usage, the nominative is used there instead of the proper case.! Why should the more lax usage not be possible here ὃ Had it been, indeed, the acceptance of the more lax usage of the nominative in Luke 19” and 21 57 only, which compelled us to admit ἐλαιών into the New Testament lexicon, then we might have had our doubts. But the word comes to us in Acts 1” on the unanimous testimony of all authorities, and, moreover, in a form which is not liable to doubt, viz., the genitive. We may well admire the boldness with which Blass here corrects ἐλαιῶνος into ἐλαιῶν, but we are unable to follow his example.
1To mention a similar case: When we read the title of a book, e.g., ‘‘ Jesu Predigt in ihrem Gegensatz zum Judenthum. Hin religionsgeschicht- licher Vergleich von Lic. W. Bousset, Privatdocent in Géttingen,’’ we would not say that Privatdocent is used as an indeclinable, but would decide that it is one of the many cases of a more lax usage of the nominative in titles of books. [In German we ought, properly speaking, to write ‘‘ Privatdocenten,”” 2.€., the dative.—TR. |
Ν. 40, 41] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 213
ἐνώπιον.
H. A. A. Kennedy! assigns the ‘‘ adverb” ἐνώπιον, which is used in the Bible as a preposition, to the class of ‘“bibli- cal” words, 1.6., those belonging to the LXX and the N. T. only. According to A. Buttmann, p. 273, the ‘‘ preposition” is “probably of EHastern”’ origin, and according to Winer- Liinemann, p. 201, ‘“‘the preposition ἐνώπιον (xpd) itself,”’ may be said to belong almost entirely to ‘ the Hebrew colouring of the language.” These statements are not par- ticularly informative; but, at all events, their purport is easily gathered, viz., ἐνώπιον 15 anew formation of ““ biblical”’ Greek.2 But BU. 578 (Fayytim, 189 A.D.) attests the adver- bial use of the word as regards Egypt. That the Papyrus is comparatively late does not signify. Linei runs: petad(os) ἐνώπι(ον) ὡς καθήκ(ει) τοῖς προστεταγμί(ένοις) ἀκολού[ζθως ;* similarly line τι. might be restored thus : τοῦ δεδομένου ὑπομνή- ματος avtiyp(adov) μεταδοθήτω ὡς ὑπόκ[ εἰται ἐνώπιον). It 1s evident that μεταδιδόναι ἐνώπιον is an official formula. Pro- fessor Wilcken of Breslau was good enough to give the author the following information on this point. He thinks that the formula, which is otherwise unknown to him, signifies to deliver personally: ‘“‘ the demand for payment shall be made to the debtor, face to face, for the greater security of the creditor ”.
It is not an impossible, but an improbable, supposition that this adverbial ἐνώπιον was used first of all with the genitive in the LXX: ἐ[ν]ώπιό[ν] τένων is already found in a Papyrus of the British Museum—from the Thebaid, and of the 2nd or Ist cent. B.C.—in Grenfell,* No. xxxvill. u, p. 70.
1 Sources of New Testament Greek, Kdinburgh, 1895, p. 90.
2 Cf. also Blass, Gramm., p.125[Eng. Trans., p. 127f.] “ ἐνώπιον ...., KaTev@mioy...., ἔναντι... κατέναντι... are derived from the LXX, and are unknown in profane authors even of later times”’.—Yet on p. xii. Blass refers to ἔναντι as being profane Greek !!
5. Also in line 6 the editor, Krebs, restores ἐν[ὠπι]ον; in that case the combination μεταδιδόναι ἐνώπιον would be repeated here also. Wilcken, how- ever, questions the correctness of this restoration, and proposes éy[reiA Joy, as he has informed the author by letter.
4 See above, p. 203, note 2,
214 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 41, 42
emtovatos.!
In the discussion of this word, so far as we have seen, no attention has been paid to an interesting observa- tion of Grimm—not even by himself in the Clavis. He makes a note to 2 Macc. 1° (προσηνέγκαμεν θυσίαν Kai σεμί- δαλιν καὶ ἐξήψαμεν τοὺς λύχνους Kai προεθήκαμεν τοὺς ἄρτους) as follows: ‘‘An arbitrary but, on account of Matt. 6 1 and Luke 113, a remarkable amplification in three Codd. Sergii, viz., τοὺς ἐπιουσίους 2 This signifies the show-bread offerings. What connection has it with this reading? What can be learned of these MSS. (unknown to the author) ?
We are now (1900) in a position to answer these questions through a friendly communication of Professor Nestle of Maulbronn (cf. also B[lass], Lit. Centralblatt, 1898, p. 1810).
The ‘Codices Sergii” are not, as one might expect, Greek MSS., but are probably identical with the Armenian codices mentioned in the Praefatio ad Genesin of Holmes [and Parsons’] edition of the LXX, i., Oxford, 1798, p. v., which were collated in 1773, in the Library of St. James at Jerusalem, by the Armenian priest Sergius Malea (Novum Testamentum Graece, ed. Tischendorf, 8th edition, vol. 11., by Gregory, p. 914). So far as we are aware, it has not been shown that Malea collated Greek MSS. also. In 2 Macc. 18, Malea has probably re-translated an amplification found in his Armenian MSS. into Greek. Thus there still remain the following questions to be answered :—
1. How does this addition run in these Armenian MS8.?
2. Is this Armenian word identical with the Armenian word for ἐπιούσιος in the Lord’s Prayer ?
ιν ’ / εὐάρεστος (and evapéotas). Cremer ὃ, p. 160 f. says of εὐάρεστος : ‘‘ except in Xen. Mem. 8,5, 5: δοκεῖ μοι ἄρχοντι evapertépws *” [read εὐαρεστο- τέρως] διακεῖσθαι ἡ 7OALs—unNless (contra Lobeck, Phryn., p.
1 The testimony of Origen renders it probable that this word is actually a ‘‘ biblical’? one; thus, strictly speaking, it should not be treated here.
2 HApAT. iv. (1857), p. 35.
Ν. 42, 48] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 215
621) εὐαρεσκοτέρως should be read here as better suiting the meaning—only in bibl. and eccles. Greek. In any case, like its derivatives, belonging otherwise only to later Greek.” As this passage from Xenophon possibly authenticates the adverb, it should not be mentioned in connection with the adjective ; the adverb is specially discussed by Cremer, and, indeed, with the correct piece of information, p. 161: “now and then in Epictetus”. The adverbial cases being put aside, Cremer’s statement that evapeotos is “only” biblical and ecclesiastical, seems to become more probable: though, indeed, the “otherwise” in the next sentence leaves open the possibility that the word also occurs elsewhere. All doubt as to the point, however, must disappear in the light of the passage from an Inscription of Nisyros (undated, pre- Christian ? Mittheilungen des athen. Instituts 15, p. 134) line ll ἢ: γενόμενον εὐάρεστον πᾶσι Moreover, the occurrence of the adverb in [Xenophon (?) and] Epictetus ought to have warned against the isolating of the adjective. εὐαρέστως is also found in CIG. 2885 = Lebas, Asie, 33 (Branchidae, B.c.):
7 \ ς / > / a ΄ τελέσασα τὴν ὑδροφορίαν εὐαρέστως τοῖς πολείταις.
ἱερατεύω.
Cremer,® p. 462: ‘‘ not used in profane Greek ; only occa- sionally in later writers,e.g., Herodian, Heliodorus, Pausanias”. Now, first of all, Josephus, the earliest of the ‘“ later writers,” is omitted here. Next, it is a contradiction to say, first, that the word is not used, and then to bring forward a number of authors who do use it. It would have been more accurate to say: “used in later Greek”. This would imply of course that it is no longer justifiable to isolate the word as a biblical one. Kennedy? draws the conclusions of the theory of Cremer by making the conjecture that since ἱερατεύω does not occur before the LXX, it was possibly formed by them and was transmitted from “ Jewish-Greek ” into the common
1 The author is indebted for this and the following passage to a refer- ence of Frankel, p. 315, relating to Perg. 461.
2 Sources of N. T. Greek, p. 119.
216 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 43, 44
tongue.' In these circumstances it is very fortunate that the Inscriptions yield quite a multitude of examples of this very word, which go back to the age of the LXX, and infallibly prove that one may safely say: ‘‘very common in later Greek”. Of the examples which occur in the two collections of Inscriptions investigated by the author, viz., those of the Aigean Sea (fasc. 1.) and of Pergamos, let it suffice here to mention only the pre-Christian ones: IMAe. 8082 (Rhodes, 3rd cent. B.c.), 811 (Rhodes, 3rd cent. B.c.), 631.2 (Rhodes, 2nd cent. B.c.), 35 (Rhodes, 1st cent. B.c.); Perg. 167 3.5.15 (ca. 166 B.c.), 129 and 130 (before 1383 B.c.).
καθαρίζω.
Cremer,® p. 490, asserts it to be a fact ‘that καθαρίζω is found only in Biblical? and (seldom indeed) in ecclesiastical Greek”. But already Clavis *.3 quotes Joseph. Antt. 11, 5, 4, ἐκαθάριζε τὴν περὶ ταῦτα συνήθειαν. More important still is the occurrence of the word in the Inscriptions in a ceremonial sense. The Mystery-Inscription of Andania in the Pelo- ponnesus (93 or 91 B.c.) prescribes, in line 37: ἀναγραψάντω δὲ καὶ ad’ ὧν δεῖ καθαρίζειν καὶ ἃ μὴ δεῖ ἔχοντας εἰσπορεύεσθαι (Dittenberger, Sylloge No. 388, p. 571). Further, there come into consideration the directions (preserved in a double form® in the Inscriptions) of Xanthos the Lycian for the sanctuary of Men Tyrannos, a deity of Asia Minor, which he had founded: CIA. πὶ. 74,* cf. 73 (found near Sunium, not older than the imperial period). No unclean person shall enter the temple: cabapitéctw δὲ ἀπὸ σ[κ]όρδων κα[ὶ χοιρέων] κα[ὶ γυναικός], λουσαμένους δὲ κατακέφαλα αὐθημερὸν εἰ σπορεύ]εσθαι. In the rough draught CJA. iii. 73 we find, further, καὶ ἀπὸ νεκροῦ καθαρίσξεσται “ἴὁ Sexa[taijav. The construction with ἀπό in these instances is the same as in, e.g., 2 Cor. 71, Hebr. 9%,
1 He certainly discusses the other possibility, viz., that the word was used previously to the LXX.
2 Ttalics from Cremer.
3 The one copy CIA, iii. 73 is the rough draught, so to speak: the other has had the language corrected, and gives a longer text.
4 = Dittenberger, Sylloge No. 379.
Ν. 44, 45] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 217
which latter passage is to be interpreted in the light of the well-known idea, exemplified in the above-mentioned Inscription and frequently elsewhere, viz., that the touching of a corpse renders one ceremonially unclean.!
κυριακός.
1. Clavis*, p. 254, still describes the word as vox solum biblica et eccles., and A. Julicher? maintains, indeed, that the Apostle Paul invented this ‘‘new’’ word. On the other hand, Cremer,’ p. 583, notes the extra-biblical usage: ‘‘ belonging to the lord, the ruler, 6.4., τὸ κυριακόν, public or fiscal property ; synon. τὸ βασιλικὸν (rare)”’. This statement is probably to be traced back to Stephanus, who cites “‘ Inscript. Richteri, p. 416”. But since the publication of the Richter Inscrip- tions by Johann Valentin Francke (Berlin, 1830), κυριακός has been comparatively frequently noticed in Inscriptions and Papyri. We note the following cases. In the decree of Ti. Julius Alexander, Prefect of Egypt, C/G. 49571s (El- Khargeh or Ghirgé in the Great Oasis, 68 A.D), to which Professor Wilcken of Breslau has called the author's atten- tion, there occurs τῶν ὀφειλόντων εἰς κυριακὸν λόγον. The κυριακὸς λόγος 15 the Imperial Treasury: the κύριος to which the word relates is the Emperor® himself. Similarly, in BU. lis f. (Fayytim, 3rd cent. A.D.) we read: al?] καὶ δ[ια]γραφό- μεναι εἰς TOV κυριακὸν λόγον ὑπὲρ ἐπικεφαλίο[υ] τῶν ὑπεραι- ρόντων ἱερέων, and these [the afore-mentioned sums] have also been paid into the imperial treasury for the poll-tax of the super- numerary priests*; and, in BU. 26617 f. (Fayyaim, 216-217 A.D.), we find the imperial service: εἰς Tas ἐν Συρίᾳ κυρι[αἸἰκὰς ὑπηρεσίας τῶν γενναιοτάτω[ν] στρατευμάτων τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν ᾿Αυτοκράτορος Σε[ου]ήρου ᾿ΑντωνίνουιΤ͵ But there are also
1 Examples from classical antiquity in Frankel, p. 188 f.
2 Hinleitung in das Neue Testament, 1st and 2nd edn. Freiburg and Leipzig, 1894, p. 31.
3 Cf., in line 13 of the same edict, ταῖς κυριακαῖς ψήφοις.
4 This [i.e., the German] translation is from a letter of Wilcken. The author has since found in BU. 62015 (Fayytim, 3rd cent. a.D.) προσετέθη ἐν Tots Kupiakois Adyo[ts].
218 BIBLE STUDIES. [N .45, 46
examples from Asia Minor—all of the imperial period. The κυριακὸς φίσκος is mentioned in CIG. 3919 (Hierapolis in Phrygia), and is to be obtained by restoration in the Inscrip- tions CIG. 3953 h andi, also from Phrygia; it occurs also in CIG. 2842 (Aphrodisias in Caria), cf. 2827. Finally, the κυριακαὶ vmnpecias are again found in CIG. 3490 (Thyatira in Lydia).?
2. With reference to the early Christian designation of Sunday as ἡ κυριακὴ ἡμέρα or, shortly, ἡ κυριακή," Cremer,® p. 583, observes that it appears to be analogous to the ex- pression κυριακὸν δεῖπνον; H. Holtzmann* says still more definitely: ‘‘The expression, moreover, is formed after the analogy of Setrvov xupiaxov”’. If we are to seek for an analogy at all, there is another, found in the idiom of the imperial period, which seems to the author to be much more obvious. He gives it here—though, of course, he would not maintain that the Christians consciously took it as the pattern for the formation of their own technical expression. In the Inscription of Pergamus 374 Β 4. 8 and D1 (consecration of the Pergamenian association of the ὑμνῳδοὶ θεοῦ Σεβαστοῦ καὶ θεᾶς “Ῥώμης, reign of Hadrian), the abbreviation ‘‘ 38.” occurs three times. Mommsen (in Frankel, p. 265) gives the following explanation of this: “Σεβ. in Ba.s and Duo is Σεβαστῇ, and affords a brilliant confirmation of the conjec- ture of Usener, viz., that the first of every month was called Σεβαστή in Asia Minor, just as the same is now established in regard to Egypt; cf. eg., Lightfoot, The Apostolic Fathers, part u., vol.i, p. 695”’;° and Frankel, p. 512, cites a new
1 This is the Richter Inscription named above.
2 θεῖος is also used in a corresponding manner: the θεῖαι διατάξεις, in Pap. Par. 69 iii. 2 (Elephantiné, 232 a.p.), edited by Wilcken, Philologus, liii. (1894), p. 83, cf. p. 95, are wmperial arrangements.
>The earliest passages are given in A. Harnack’s Bruchstiicke des Evangeliums und der Apokalypse des Petrus? (TU. ix. 2), Leipzig, 1893, p. 67.
4 HC. iv? (1893), p. 318.
> The author is indebted to a communication of his friend B. Bess of Gottingen for the information that Lightfoot, p. 694 f., gives the following references for Σεβαστή: CIG. 4715 and Add. 5866 ὁ (both of the time of Augus-
Ν. 46, 47] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 219
authority for Σεβαστή as first day of the month in the Inscrip- tion of Iasos,—given by Th. Reinach in the Revue des Biudes Grecques, vi. (1893), p. 159,—line2s, καὶ τὸν κατ᾽ ἐνιαυτὸν γενόμενον τόκον δώσει αἰεὶ τοῦ παρελθόντος ἐνιαυτοῦ μηνὶ πρώτῳ Σεβαστῇ. Just as the first day of the month was thus called Emperor’s day, so the first day of the week—with all its significant connection with the Gospel history—would be named, by the Christians, the Lord’s day. The analogy obtains its full importance when considered in relation to the entire usage of κύριος."
λογεία.
We have succeeded in tracing this word in other quarters ;” first, in Pap. Grenfell and Hunt (Oxford, 1897), No. xxxviil.is (81 B.c.) and BU. 5157+. (Fayyam, 193 a.p.)— adopting the corrected reading of Wilcken given in vol. 11. of the Berlin MSS., p. 357; also in a compound: BU. 5388 16¢. (Fayyam, 100 A.D.) βοτανισμοὺς καὶ σιφονολογείας ὃ καὶ τὴν ἄλλην γεωργικὴν [ὑπη]ρ[εσί]ϊαν. We would next call attention to 2 Macc. 123. O. F. Fritzsche there reads: ποιησάμενός TE KAT ἀνδρολογίαν κατασκευάσματα εἰς ἀργυρίου δραχμὰς δισχιλίας ἀπέστειλεν εἰς ᾿Ιεροσόλυμα προσαγαγεῖν περὶ ἁμαρτίας θυσίαν. Grimm‘ translates the first words when by means of a collection he had provided himself with money- supplies, and explains thus: ‘‘ avépodXoyia, on the analogy of ξενολογία, levying, collecting of soldiers for military service, can here mean nothing else than collectio viritim facta: cf. Novia, which similarly does not occur in profane Greek, for συλλογή.
tus), 4957 (Galba) from Egypt ; from Ephesus, an Inscription of the year 104 A.D.; from Traianopolis, Lebas and Waddington, 1676 (130 a.p.). The investigations of Usener are given in the Bullettino dell’ Instit. di Corr. Archeol., 1874, p. 73 ff.
1 The author hopes at some future time to be able to make an investiga- tion of the use of ὁ κύριος and ὁ κύριος ἡμῶν to designate deities and emperors in the imperial period.
2 Cf. p. 142 ff. above.
° So reads the Papyrus: which σίφωνες are meant the author does not clearly understand.
4 HApAT. iv. (1857), p. 183 f.
220 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 47, 48
Since Codd. 44 and 71 give κατ᾽ ἄνδρα λογίαν (74: Kat’ avdpa- λογίαν), and again Codd. 52, 55, 74, 106, and 243 omit κατασκευάσματα, one might feel tempted to regard the former as the original reading and the latter as a gloss to λογίαν —unless perhaps κατασκευάσμ. was too uncommon a word, and the more familiar συλλογή was a more obvious gloss”. We’ cannot comprehend how Grimm can thus speak of avéporoyia! as analogous to ξενολογία: for this analogy would precisely imply that ἀνδρολογία means a levying of men. Quite as certainly must it be questioned that the word can signify a collection from each single man. But since this signi- fication is required by the connection, the reading κατ᾽ ἄνδρα λογίαν (read Noyetav”) certainly deserves serious considera- tion; on this view, κατασκευάσματα may quite well be retained: after he had taken a collection from each individual he sent money to the amount of about 2000 drachmas of silver® to Jerusalem.*
veopuTos.
Used in LXX Ps. 127 [Hebr. 128], 148 [144], Is. 5%, Job 14°, in its proper sense; in 1 Tim. 3°, novice. Cremer’, Ῥ. 987, says: ‘‘a new growth; elsewhere only in bibl. and eccles. Greek (according to Poll. also used by Aristoph.)”’ ; Clavis*, p. 295, quotes the Biblical passages, adding only “ script. eccles.”. But the reference of Pollux to Aristophanes ought to have warned against isolating the word in this way, a procedure not supported in the slightest by its form or mean- ing. νεόφυτος is found in BU. 563 1.9.14. 16, 11. 6.15 (Fayy am, 2nd cent. A.D.),° applied to newly-planted palm-trees (ο΄. LX X
1 The edition of Van Ess, like Wahl in the Clavis librorum V.T. Apocry- phorum, p. 44, reads ἀνδραλογία. This is a printer’s error in Wahl, as is ἀνδραφονέω a little farther on (cf. the alphabetical order). The author cannot say whether ἀνδραλογία is a possible form.
2 Above, p. 143.
3A construction like e.g., εἰς ἑξήκοντα ταλάντων λόγος, a sum of about sixty talents.
4 Swete writes ποιησάμενός τε κατ᾽ ἀνδρολογεῖον εἰς ἀργυρίου δραχμὰς δισχιλίας... . What κατ᾽ ἀνδρολογεῖον is meant to signify we do ποῦ under- stand.
5 “ Of the time of Hadrian at the earliest ” (Wilcken re this Papyrus).
N. 48, 49] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 221
Ps. 127 [128]?, νεόφυτα ἐλαιῶν ; similarly in BU. 5651 and 566s (fragments of the same document as 563).
ὀφειλή.
Clavis*, p. 326, ‘‘ Neque im graeco V. Ti. cod., neque ap. profanos offenditur’’. This negative statement is at all events more cautious than the positive one of Cremer’, p. 737: ‘only in New Testament Greek’’. But both are invalidated by the Papyri.! The word, meaning debt (in the literal sense, asin Matt. 18°), is found in formulae in BU. 112u (ca. 60 A.D.) καθαρὰ ἀπό τε ὀφιλῆς "ὁ καὶ U[ π]οθήκης Kal παντὸς διεγγυή- ματος, 18425 (72 A.D.) [καθ]αρὸν ἀπὸ [ὀ]φειλ(ῆς) [καὶ] ὑποθήκ[ης καὶ παντὸς] δ᾽ ε]Ἰενγυ[ἡμίατος)] “5, ὅ86 6. (reign of Domitian) καθ[αρ]ὰ ἀπὸ τε ὀφειλ(ῆς) [καὶ ὑπο]θήκης καὶ παντὸς διεγ- γί(υήματος), PER. ccxx.10 (1st cent. A.D.”) καθαρὸν ἀπ᾽ ὀφειλῆς [πά]ση(ς) καὶ παντὸς Scevyunpatos*’, further in BU. 62419 (time of Diocletian) ἱερᾶς μὴ ἀμέλει ὀφιλῆ[ς] "4.3. All these Papyri are from the Fayytiim.
5 \ , ΟἼΤΟ πέρυσι.
‘““ Many of these compounds [ὲ.6. combinations of pre- positions with adverbs of place and time] are found only in writers later than Alexander, some only in the Scholiasts . a ; others, such as ἀπὸ πέρυσι (for which προπέρυσι or ἐκπέρυσι was used) are not to be met with even there.” ἡ But we find ἀπὸ πέρυσι (2 Cor. 8.19, 9”) in the Papyrus letter BU, 581 11.1 (Fayyam, 2nd cent. A.D.), also in the Oxyrhyn- chos Papyrus (ed. by Grenfell and Hunt, London, 1898), No. Cxiv. 12 (2nd-3rd cent. A.D.): ἀπὸ Τῦβι πέρυσι.
1 The author has subsequently noticed in Pape that even the Htymo- logicum Magnum quotes the word from Xenophon!! The New Testament lexicographers really ought to have noted this. The note of the Ht. M. in regard to ὀφειλή is as follows: ... σπανίως δὲ εὕρηται ἐν χρήσει" εὑρίσκεται δὲ παρὰ Ξενοφῶντι ἐν τοῖς Περὶ Πόρων.
2 But on p. 296 this Papyrus is assigned to the 2nd cent.
3 We do not quite understand this; the sacred debt is perhaps a debt owing to the temple treasury.
4 Winer-Liinemann, p. 394.
222 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 49, 50
προσευχή.
1. According to Cremer’, p. 420, the word appears ‘“‘not to occur at all in profane Greek... and therefore to be a word of Hellenistic formation, which follows the change which had taken place in the use of προσεύχεσθαι, and which is at the same time a characteristic mark of the difference between Israel and the Gentile world”. But the fact that προσευχή, place of prayer, is found also in connection with pagan worship? tells against this isolating of the word.
2. The authorities for προσευχή in the sense of a Jewish place of prayer® which up till now have been known and applied are most likely all surpassed in age by an Inscription from Lower Egypt, which probably belongs to the 3rd cent. B.C., viz., CLL. 11, Suppl. 6583 (original in the Berlin Egyptian Museum): ‘‘ Βασιλίσσης καὶ βασίλεως προσταξάντων ἀντὶ τῆς προανακειμένης περὶ τῆς ἀναθέσεως τῆς προσευχῆς πλακὸς ἡ ὑπογεγραμμένη ἐπιγραφήτω. Βασιλεὺς Πτολεμαῖος Εὐεργέτης τὴν προσευχὴν ἄσυλον. Regina et rex iusserunt.” ‘‘ As Mommsen has recognised, the queen and the king who caused the synagogue Inscription to be re- newed are Zenobia and Vaballath [ca. 270 a.p.]. Whether the founder is Kuergetes I. or IL he leaves an open ques- tion.””* Wailcken decides for Euergetes I. (+ 222 B.c.) in opposition to Willrich, who contends for Kuergetes II. (¢ 117 B.c.). The reasons given by the former have satisfied the present writer: to go into the matter more particularly would meanwhile carry us too far from the point. But it may be permitted to reproduce Wilcken’s interesting con-
1 The author has not as yet met with the word, in the sense of prayer, in heathen usage. But the question as to its ‘‘formation” is sufficiently answered by showing that it occurs outside of the Bible. It is improbable that the heathen usage is in any way to be traced back to Jewish influence.
2 References in Schiirer, Geschichte des jiidischen Volkes im Zeitalter Jesu Christi, ii. (1886), p. 370 = * ii., Ὁ. 444 (Eng. Trans. ii., ii., p. 69).
3 References ibid., and in Thayer s.v. The latter cites aiso Cleomedes 71, 16.
4 Wilcken, Berl. Philol. Wochenschr., xvi. (1896), col. 1493 (Review of Willrich, Juden und Griechen vor der makkab. Erhebung, Gottingen, 1895.
Ν. 50, 51] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 223
cluding remark about the Inscription (col. 1419): ‘‘ Most probably it has hitherto remained unnoticed that the omis- sion of θεός before Evepyetns is a unique phenomenon, as the ascription of Divinity ought, according to rule, to stand in official papers. We gather, then, that the king has here renounced the use of θεός in consideration of the sensitive- ness of the Jews.”
σουδάριον.
Neither Clavis* nor Thayer gives any example of this! outside of the N.T. But in the marriage-contracts, PER. XxvVil.7% (190 A.D.) and xxi.19 (230 A.D.), the σουδάριον is mentioned among the toilet articles of the dowry.
[2 / ὑποπόδιον.
Winer-Schmiedel, ὃ 3, 26 (p. 23), continues to count ὑποπόδιον (found first in the LXX) among the words which the Jews themselves may possibly have formed by analogy, but which may have been already current in the popular tongue, though not as yet so found by us. Clavis® gives extra-biblical examples from Lucian and Athenaeus. These would, in the author’s opinion, be sufficient to do away with the idea of the Jewish origin of the word. But still more decisive is its occurrence in the Papyri. In the two marriage-contracts from the Fayyam, PER. xxii.s (reign of Antoninus Pius) and xxvii. 1 (190 4.D.), among the articles of furniture belonging to the bride there is mentioned a settle, with its accompanying footstool, καθέδρα σὺν ὑποποδίῳ.
3. SUPPOSED SPECIAL “ BIBLICAL”’ OR ‘“‘ NEW TESTAMENT” MEANINGS AND CONSTRUCTIONS.
ἀντίλημψις.
To the older passages from the Ptolemaic Papyri, in which the word is secularised (meaning help”), there is to be
In the case of a Graecism like covddpiov (authenticated hitherto only for the N.T.), if anywhere at all, we have to deal with a simple case of chance.
2 Above, p. 92.
224 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 51, 52
added BU. 6131s (Fayyaim, probably of the reign of Antoninus Pius).
/ ἀρεσκεία.
‘Even those terms which, among the Greeks, are debased to common uses on account of their exclusive human appli- cation, such as ἀρέσκεια “2, the obsequiousness which suits itself to everybody, obtain in the scriptures a higher con- notation by reason of the predominance of their relation to the Divine standard. The word occurs in Col. 11° in an undoubtedly good sense, and this transformation is to be attributed chiefly to the prevailing usage of ἀρεστός and εὐάρεστος in the LXX and the New Testament.’ This asser- tion of G. von Zezschwitz! ought not to have been made, since Lésner had long before pointed out quite a number of passages in Philo in which the word has unquestionably a good sense—indeed, that of a relation towards God.? ἀρεσκεία 15 also used in a good sense in the Inscription in Latyschev’s Inscriptiones regni Bosporani, 11.5 (date?): χάριν τῆς εἰς τὴν πόλιν ἀρεσκείας."
ἐπιθυμητής.
Used by the Greeks, according to Cremer ὃ, p. 456, in a good sense; ‘‘on the other hand” in 1 Cor. 10°, ἐπιθυμητὴς κακῶν, ‘corresponding to the development of the idea which has been noted under ἐπιθυμία". But it is found in a bad sense also in BU. 5381 ii.2 (Fayytiim, 2nd cent. A.D.): οὔτε εἰμὶ ἄδικος οὔτε a[A]NoTpiwy ἐπιθυμητής."
e / Nag Kopat.
According to Cremer’, p. 471, the construction of this word in “ biblical” Greek deviates from the usage of profane authors ‘in a striking manner’’. In proof of this, the com-
1 Profangraecitaet und biblischer Sprachgeist, Leipzig, 1859, p. 61. 2 These references have rightly been adopted by Cremer ὃ, p. 159. 5 This quotation is from Frankel, p. 315.
4 We have in this combination a synonym for ἀλλοτριοεπίσκοπος, hitherto authenticated only for Christian usage; this compound becomes intelligible by comparison with ἄδικος.
N. 52] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 225
pound ἐξιλάσκομαι is specially adduced, the usage of which in ‘‘ biblical” Greek, as contrasted with the constructions of profane Greek, is said to be ‘‘all the more noteworthy and all the more deserving of serious consideration’. Cremer deems the biblical phrase é&iXdoKxecOar τὰς ἁμαρτίας to be one of the “ most striking in comparison with profane Greek ”.! It is, however, to be met with outside the Bible. In the directions (preserved in a duplicated Inscription) of the Lycian Xanthus for the sanctuary, founded by him, of Men Tyrannos, a deity of Asia Minor, CIA. ii. 74,? cf. 73 (found near Sunium, not older than the imperial period), there occurs the peculiar passage: ὃς ἂν δὲ πολυπραγμονήσῃ τὰ τοῦ θεοῦ ἢ περιεργάσηται,) ἁμαρτίαν ὀφ(ε)ιλέτω Μηνὶ Τυράννῳ, ἣν οὐ μὴ δύνηται ἐξειλάσασθαι “ἷ͵
Further, the ἁμαρτίαν ὀφείλω in this passage is also very interesting ; it 15 manifestly used like χρέος ὀφείλω, ἁμαρτία being thought of as debt.
λικμάω.
In Luke 2018 (cf. possibly Matt. 21“) πᾶς ὁ πεσὼν ἐπ᾽ ἐκεῖνον τὸν λίθον συνθλασθήσεται" ἐφ᾽ ὃν δ᾽ ἂν πέσῃ, λικμήσει αὐτόν, B. Weiss‘ and H. Holtzmann ὃ take λικμᾶν as winnow, the only meaning hitherto authenticated. But, for one thing, this does away altogether with the parallelism of the two clauses, and, for another, gives us a figure which is hardly conceivable, viz., every one wpon whom the stone falls, tt will winnow. Should we decide, then, on internal grounds, we arrive at a meaning for λικμᾶν which is synonymous with συνθλᾶν. In point of fact, the Vulgate understood the word in this sense: Matt. 21 * conteret, Luke 20 18 comminuet ; so also Luther and most others: it will grind to powder (zer-
1 Cf. also Blass, Gramm., Ὁ. 88, note 1 [Kng. Trans., p. 88, note 3]: “TAdokecOa: ἁμαρτίας, Heb. 21", strikes as being strange by reason of the object: the classical (ἐξ)ιλάσκ. θεόν means ‘to dispose Him in mercy towards one’. Similarly, however (= expiare), also LXX and Philo.”
2 Dittenberger, Sylloge, No. 379. Cf. p. 216 above in reference to Kabapi Cw.
3 Cf. 2 Thess. 34, + Meyer, i. 15 (1890), p. 363.
δ ἘΠ 14 (USEPA) Ton 299.’
15
226 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 53
malmen). Clavis*, p. 263, adopts this view, with the note “usu a profanis alieno”’. This is most probably one of the cases where no reason whatever can be given for the par- ticular alteration of meaning having taken place in “ biblical ”’ Greek. If λικμάω = grind to powder be possible at all, then it is only a matter of contingency that the word has not yet been found with that meaning outside the Bible. There is, however, a Papyrus which appears to the author to supply the want. In the fragment of a speech for the prosecution, BU. 146 55. (Fayyfim, 2nd-3rd cent. A.D.), the prosecutor reports : ἐπῆλθαν ᾿Αγαθοκλῆς καὶ δοῦλος Σαραπίωνος ᾿Οννώ- φρεως κ[αὶ ἄλλος ξένος] ἐργάτης αὐτοῦ τῇ ἁλωνίᾳ μου καὶ ἐλίκμησάν μου τὸ λάχανον καὶ οὐχ [ὀ]λ[]}γην ζη[ μ]είαν “ἧς μοι ἐζημιωσάμην. What the crime of the three rogues was is not altogether evident, but it is clear, neverthe- less, that they had not winnowed the λάχανον: they had trodden upon it, stamped upon it, or ruined? it in some way. We might, perhaps, have recourse to the more general meaning of destroy, which, moreover, will be found to suit the New Testament passages exceedingly well. It is conceivable that winnow might come to have this mean- ing: the connecting link would be something like scatter, which Clavis* has established for LXX Jer. 38 [911 and other passages: the heap of corn mingled with chaff is, by winnowing, separated into its constituent substances, is scattered. This conjecture has at all events better support than that made by Carr,’ viz., that the meanings winnow and crush were associated together in Egypt because in that country there was drawn over the corn, before winnowing, a threshing-board which crushed the straw (!).
"ἢ λούω.
Cremer 8, p. 623: ‘‘ While νίζειν or νίπτειν was the usual word for ceremonial washing in profane Greek—. ..... the LXX use λούειν as the rendering of the Heb. Ym, bs
1 There is a second ga placed above the first a in the original. 2 Cf. Judith 27" τὰ πεδία ἐξελίκμησε. 5 Quoted in Kennedy, Sources of N.T’. Greek, p. 126 f.
N. 54] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 227
the washings required under the theocracy for purposes of purification”. This sets up an unjustifiable antithesis be- tween “‘ profane” Greek and biblical, which Cremer himself is unable to maintain, for immediately afterwards he finds it necessary to grant that the word ‘does not, indeed, seem to have been altogether unused in profane Greek for ceremonial washing ; Plut. Probl. Rom. 264, D: λούσασθαι πρὸ τῆς θυσίας ; Soph. Ant. 1186: τὸν μὲν λούσαντες ἁγνὸν λουτρόν ᾿. Instead, then, of ‘‘not altogether unused” one may, since the above antithesis does not need to be defended, quite well say “used”. Up to the present other three ‘‘ profane” passages have become known to the author; the first two are interesting also from a grammatical point of view on account of the construction with ἀπό (Acts 16%). Perg. 255, an Inscription of the early Roman period relating to the regulations of the temple of Athena at Pergamus, ordains in line 4m that only of . . ἀπὸ μὲν τῆς ἰδίας γ[υναι]κὸς καὶ τοῦ ἰδίου ἀνδρὸς αὐθημερόν, ἀπὸ δὲ ἀλλοτρίας κ[ αὶ] ἀλλοτρίου δευτεραῖοι λουσάμενοι, ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ ἀπὸ κήδους KL α]ὶ τεκούσης γυναικὸς devtepaio(c) shall enter the sanctuary. Frankel, p. 188, makes the following remark upon this: ‘It is well- known that sexual intercourse, the touching of the dead or of women with child, rendered necessary a religious purifica- tion previous to communion with the gods”. The other two passages are adopted from the references of Frankel, p. 189. In the regulations of the Lycian Xanthus for the sanctuary of Men Tyrannos which he founded in Athens, CIA. τι. 73 (found near Sunium, not older than the imperial period), occurs quite similarly ἀπὸ δὲ γυναικὸς λουσάμενοϊν 9}. Finally, the stone from Julis, given in Rohl, Inser. antiqu., p. 395 (= Dittenberger, Sylloge, p. 468), contains the regulation that those who have become unclean by touching a corpse are purified if λουσαμένους περὶ πάντα τὸν χρῶτα ὕδατος χύσι.
πάροικος.
According to Cremer ὅ, p. 695, it appears as if ‘“‘ profane” and “biblical” Greek diverged from each other in the use of this word, and, in particular, as if πάροικος in the sense of
228 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 55:
alien were unknown in the former, which is said to use μέτοικος instead. But even in Clavis*, p. 341, we find a reference to Philo, De Cherub. § 34 (p. 160 f. M.), where πάροικος is used several times in contradistinction to πολίτης. And if Philo is not to be counted a profane author in the strict sense of the term, we have the Inscriptions to fall back upon. In 17746. 1033» (Carpathos, 2nd cent. B.c. 9) the population is divided into πολῖται and πάροικοι ; still clearer is Perg. 249 12. 20. 34 (133 B.c.), in regard to which Frankel, p. 173, remarks: ‘‘ We are informed of the following classes of the population: 1. Citizens (πολῖται), 2. Aliens (πάροικοι), 3. Various classes of soldiers (στρατιῶται. .), 4. Emancipated persons (ἐξελεύθεροι), 5. Slaves,...... Since the offspring of manumitted slaves come to be counted as aliens in terms. of line 20%. of the edict under notice, it is evident that the ἐξελεύθεροι were not, as such, transferred to the rank of the paroikoi, but in the first instance formed an intermediate class. It was the same in Ceos, according to the Inscription in Dittenberger’s Sylloge, 34810, and in Ephesus at the time of the Mithridatic war—according to Lebas, Asie, 136 a (Dittenberger, Sylloge, 253), line 43m, where also, as in our document, the δημόσιοι [ = the public slaves] are immediately raised to the class of πάροικοι, not having first to pass through that of the ἐξελεύθεροι.᾽᾿ ἢ
4. TECHNICAL TERMS. ἀθέτησις (and εἰς ἀθέτησιν).
Clavis*, p. 9, ““γαγὸ apud profanos inferioris aetatis, ut ΟἿο. ad Att. 6,9. Diog. Laert. 3. 39, 66, ap. grammat. improbatio ; saepius ap. ecclesiasticos scriptores’’. The usage of the word in Papyri from the Fayytim is particularly instructive in regard to its employment in the Epistle to the Hebrews (718, 9°) ; BU. 4416 (102 4.D.), conjoined with ἀκύρωσις in reference
1 The author gives this quotation because it yields further epigraphic materials. Kennedy, Sowrces of N. T. Greek, p. 102, also refers to the Inscriptions (CIG. 3595, “ etc.”).—Cf. now also A. Schulten, Mittheilungen des Kaiserlich-Deutschen Archdol. Instituts, Romische Abtheilung, xiii. (1898), p. 237.
N. 56] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 229
to a document ; quite similarly in 196211. (109 Α.}.), 281 ist. (reign of Trajan), and 394 μὲ (137 a.p.). In all these passages ἀθέτησις 15 used in a technical juristic sense, being found in the formula εἰς ἀθέτησιν καὶ ἀκύρωσιν. Compare these with εἰς ἀθέτησιν in Heb. 9 "5, and with the usage of the contrary formula εἰς βεβαίωσιν in LXX Lev. 25%, Heb. 61% and the Papyri.! The formula was maintained for long afterwards: we still find εἰς ἀθέτησιν καὶ ἀκύρωσιν in PER. xiv. i7t. (Fayytim, 166 A.D.) and ix.10 (Hermopolis, 271 a.D.).
ἀναπέμπω.
The references given by Clavis?, p. 27, and Thayer, p. 41, for the meaning ad personam dignitate, auctoritate, potestate supertorem sursum mitto (Luke 257, Acts 257) from Philo, Josephus and Plutarch can be largely increased from the Fayyam Papyri: BU. 19 1.20 (135 a.D.), 5 τι. το. (188 A.D.), 6134 (reign of Antoninus Pius?), 15 1.17 (194 a.p.), 16825 (2nd-3rd cent. A.D.).
ἀπέχω.
In regard to the use of this word in Matt. 6 ὁ δ᾽ 16. Luke 674, Phil. 418, as meaning I have received, its constant occur- rence in receipts in the Papyri is worthy of consideration. Two cases may be given which are significant on account of their contiguity in time to the above passages, viz., BU. 584 δὲ. (Fayyim, 29th December, 44 A.D.) καὶ ἀπέχω τὴν συνκεχωρημένην τιμὴν πᾶσαν ἐκ πλήρους, and 61221. (Hay- yum, 6th September, 57 A.D.) ἀπέχω παρ᾽ ὑμῶν τὸν φόρον τοῦ ἐλα[υ]ουργίου, ὧν ἔχετέ [μο]ὴυ ἐν μισθώσει. The words they have their reward in the Sermon on the Mount, when con- sidered in the light of the above, acquire the more pungent ironical meaning they can sign the receipt of their reward : their right to receive their reward is realised, precisely as if they had already given a receipt for it. ἀποχή means receipt exactly, and in Byzantine times we also find μισθαποχή."
1 See p. 105 ff. above.
2 Wessely, Corpus Papyrorum Raineri, i. 1,151; but no example is given there. The word might signify receipt for rent or hire, not deed of conveyance as Wessely supposes.
280 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 56, 57
βεβαίωσις.
The conjunction of the terms βεβαιοῦν or βεβαίωσις and appaBov' is also found in BU. 446 [ = 8078 (reign of Marcus Aurelius) ; the sentence is unfortunately mutilated.
διακούω.
In the technical sense of to try, to hear judicially (Acts 23 nce, Deut, 11% Dion! ‘Cass: 36, 53 [36)), also BU. 168% (Fayytim, 2nd-3rd cent. A.D.).
TO ἐπιβάλλον μέρος.
Frequent references given in connection with Luke 15”; a technical formula, also used in the Papyri: BU. 234 13.3 (Fayyfim, 121 a.p.) τὸ καὶ αὐτῷ ἐπιβάλλον μέρος, 419 δὲ. (276-277 A.D.) τὸ ἐπιβάλλον μοι μέρος of the paternal inheritance ; similarly 614171. (Fayyaim, 216 A.D.) τὴν ém- βάλλουσαν αὐτῇ τῶν πατρῴων] μερίδα.
/ ἐπίσκοπος.
Of this word as an official title Cremer ὃ, p. 889, follow- ing Pape, gives only one example outside the N. T.: “In Athens the name was applied in particular to the able men in the subject states who conducted the affairs of the same”. But we find ἐπίσκοποι as communal officials in Rhodes; thus in I[MAe. 49 438. (Qnd-1st cent. B.c.) there is named a council of five ἐπίσκοποι; in 5034 (1st cent. B.c.) three ἐπίσκοποι are enumerated. Neither Inscription gives any information as. to their functions; in the first, the ἐπίσκοποι are found among the following officials: [πρυτανεῖς (?)], γραμματεὺς βουλᾶς, ὑπογραμματεὺς [Blov[Aa]}. καὶ w[plutavedo[c], στρα- ταγοί, [ἐπὶ] τὰν χώραν, [ἐπὶ] τὸ πέραν, γραμματεύς, [ταμίαι], γραμματεύς, ἐπίσκοποι, γραμματεύς, ἐπιμεληταὶ τῶν Ever], γραμματεύς, ἁγεμὼν ἐπὶ Καύνο[υ], ἁγεμὼν ἐπὶ Καρίας, ἁγεμὼν ἐπὶ Λυκίας. In the second the order is as follows: [πρυτανεῖς (?)], [στρα]ταγοί, ταμίαι, ἐπίσκοποι, ὑπογραμ- ματεὺς βουλᾶι καὶ [πρυτανεῦσι (?)|. But it is perhaps a still more important fact that likewise in Rhodes ἐπίσκοπος was.
1 Above, p. 108 f.
Ν. 57, 58] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 951
a technical term for the holder of a religious office. The pre-Christian Inscription [MAe. 731 enumerates the following officials of the temple of Apollo: three ἐπιστάται, one γραμματεὺς ἱεροφυλάκων, one ἐπίσκοπος" in lines, six ἱεροῖ π᾿ ]οιοί, one [ταμί]ας, one v7ro[ypaypate|ds ἱερ[οφ]υλάκων. We must abstain from theorising as to the duties of this ἐπίσκοπος. The fact that the word had already been admitted into the technical religious diction of pre-Christian times is sufficiently important in itself.
θεολόγος.
This word has been admitted into the Clavis on account of its occurrence in several MSS.’ as the designation of John the writer of the Apocalypse. Frankel, p. 264f., in connec- tion with Perg. 374 A 30 (dedication of the Pergamenian Association of the ὑμνῳδοὶ θεοῦ Σεβαστοῦ καὶ θεᾶς Ῥώμης, reign of Hadrian) has collected valuable materials for the usage of Asia Minor: his notes are given as follows—the author was unable to test the quotations: “The office of a θεολόγος ([1Π6 30) 1s elsewhere shown to have existed in Pergamus, and, in fact, seems to have been conferred as a permanent one, since one and the same person, Ti. Claudius Alexandros, held it under Caracalla and under Elagabalus (see below, in reference to No. 525, lines). Another theo- logian, Glykon, as an eponymous magistrate, is met with, in Pergamon, upon a coin bearing the image of Herennius EKtruscus (Mionnet, Suppl. v., p. 472, No. 1160). Itis strange that P. Aelius Pompeianus, μελοποιὸς καὶ ῥαψῳδὸς θεοῦ “Ἀδριανοῦ, who, according to an Inscription of Nysa (Bullet. de corr. hellén. 9, 125 f., lines 4 and 63) was a θεολόγος ναῶν τῶν ἐν Περγάμῳ, is described as a citizen of Sidé, Tarsus and Rhodes, but not of Pergamus. It can be no matter of chance
l exickormo can be read quite plainly, thereafter either an ὁ or the frag- ment of another letter. The editor writes ἐπίσκοποι in his transcription. But as only one name follows it would be more correct to read ἐπίσκοπο[ 5]. It appears thus in the index, p. 235, which contains many a tacit correction.
2 Wessely reads PER. xxx.sf. (Fayyaim, 6th cent. a.D.) του αγιου ἴωαννου Tov evAoyou και ευαγγελιστου, and translates of Saint John, the apostle and evangelist. Should not θεολόγου be read ?
232 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 58, 59
that we find the title θεολόγος in the two cities of Asia Minor (invested like Pergamus with the Neokoria) in con- nection with which we were able to demonstrate the exis- tence of the imperial Hymnodia as well: for Smyrna the existence of theologians is attested by the passage from C/G. 3148, copied out above (p. 205, end) in connection with No. 269 [linessit: ὅσα ἐνετύχομεν παρὰ τοῦ κυρίου Καίσαρος “Ἁδριανοῦ διὰ ᾿Αντωνίου Πολέμωνος - δεύτερον δόγμα συγκλήτου, καθ᾽ ὃ δὶς νεωκόροι γεγόναμεν, ἀγῶνα ἱερόν, ἀτέλειαν, θεολόγους, ὑμνῳδούς], and by CIG. 3348, where, as in our Inscription, the same individual is ὑμνῳδὸς καὶ θεολόγος ; for Ephesus by the Greek Inscr. in the Brit. Mus. 111. 2, No. 481, line 191 τ: ὁμοίως Kal τοῖς θεολόγοις Kal ὑμνῳδοῖς, in which one must, in conse- quence of the article being used but once, likewise interpret as ‘theologians who were also hymnodists’. In Heraklea in the Pontus there is a theologian for the mysteries: CIG. 3803, ὑπατικὸν καὶ θεολόγον τῶν τῇδε pvoTnpiov,—and also in Smyrna the female theologians, αἱ θεολόγοι, whom we find there along with the male, are engaged in the mysteries of Demeter Thesmophoros: CIG. 3199, 3200.”
πλῆθος.
This word, followed by a national name in the genitive, often signifies not multitude simply, but people in the official political sense. Thus we have τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων in 1 Macc. 8”, 2 Macc. 111° (like ὁ δῆμος τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων, ver. 84) Ep. Arist., p. 671s (Schm.), and most likely also in Acts 25 3, The Inscriptions yield further material in regard to this usage: [MAe. 854 (Rhodes, 3rd cent. B.c.) τὸ πλῆθος τὸ “Ροδίων, similarly 907 (Rhodes, 1st cent. B.c.) ; further, 84610 τὸ πλῆθος τὸ Λινδίων (Rhodes, date ?), similarly 847 14 (Rhodes, 1st cent. A.D.) and many other Inscriptions from Rhodes.
The word has a technical sense also in the usage of the religious associations: it designates the associates in their totality, the community or congregation, I[MAe. 1556 (Rhodes, 2nd cent. 8.6.) τ[ὸ] πλῆθος τὸ ᾿Αλιαδᾶν καὶ [Αλια]στᾶν ; similarly 1505.: Compare with these Luke 11, 19 57, Acts
1 The editor, in the index, p, 238, remarks upon this “ πλῆθος, 7.q., κοινόν ᾿".
Ν. 60] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 233
2°, but especially 15%°, where the Christian Church at Antioch is called τὸ πλῆθος. Thus also τὸ πλῆθος in 4” should hardly be interpreted as multitude, mass, but as community ; similarly in 67°, 1515, 199, 21%.
πρᾶγμα ἔχω πρός τινα.
πρᾶγμα is very frequently used in the Papyri in the forensic sense of law-swit ; we cite only BU. 22st. (Fayytim, 114 A.D.) ἁπλῶς μηδὲν ἔχουσα πρᾶγμα πρὸς ἐμέ, ἴῃ Connection with 1 Cor. 6: τὶς ὑμῶν πρᾶγμα ἔχων πρὸς τὸν ἕτερον.
πρεσβύτερος.
At p. 154 f. the attempt was made to demonstrate, first, that πρεσβύτερος was, till late in the imperial period, the technical term in Egypt for the occupant of an office in civil communities,—a usage by which the LXX did not fail to be influenced ; secondly, that a similar usage could be established for Asia Minor. The application of the word in its religious sense among Catholic Christians, which can be made clear by the series tpeoSBvtepos—presbyter—priest, is illustrated by the fact that πρεσβύτεροι can also be shown to have been an official title of pagan priests in Egypt. In confirmation of this, afew sentences from F. Krebs! may be given here. ‘‘ The organisation of the priest- hood in the different temples in the Roman period was still the same as it had been, according to the testimony of the decree of Kanopus, in the Ptolemaic period. To begin with, the priesthood is divided according to descent into 5 φυλαί as at that time” (p. 34)... . “In Ptolemaic times the affairs of the whole Egyptian priesthood were conducted by an annually changing council of 25 members (πρεσβύτεροι "
᾿ ‘Agyptische Priester unter rimischer Herrschaft in the Zeitschrift fiir dgypt. Sprache und Alterthumskunde, xxxi. (1893), p. 31 ff.—Reference is made on p. 34 to Wilcken, Kaiserl. Tempelverwaltung in Agypten, Hermes, Xxlil., p. 592, and Arsinoitische Tempelrechnungen, Hermes, xx., p. 430.
2 There is one passage belonging to the Ptolemaic period attesting πρεσβύτεροι in this sense which is not cited here by Krebs. In C/G. 4717 51. (Thebes in Lower Egypt, between 45 and 37 B.c.) it is said: [ἔδο]ξε τοῖς ἀπὸ Διοσπόλεως Tis μεγάλης flepedor το[ῦ μεγίστου θεοῦ ᾿Αμο]νρασωνθὴρ καὶ τοῖς mpe- σβυτέροις καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις πᾶσι. Here the πρεσβύτεροι plainly belong to the priest- hood.
234 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 61, 62
or βουλευταί). In our little provincial temple! we find
. corresponding to it, a council—also changed yearly— of ‘five of the oldest of the five phyle of the god Sokno- paios for the present 23rd year’ (7.e., of Antoninus Pius = 159-160 A.D.). This council gives in a report which the Roman authorities had demanded from it concerning disci- plinary proceedings against a priest of the temple” (p. 35). The author has met with these Egyptian πρεσβύτεροι in the following Papyri from the Fayyfim: BU. 165. (159-160 a.p. —the passage quoted by Krebs), τῶν ε΄ πρεσβυτέρων ἱερέων πενταφυλίας θεοῦ Soxvo[wjaiov; 347 1.5:. (171 A.D.), Σατα- βοῦτος π[ρεσ]βυτέρο[ζυ (epéw]s? ; in 587 1.74. (between 177 and 181 a.D., much mutilated) the 5 πρεσβύτεροι ἱερεῖς of Sokno- paios are undoubtedly again spoken of ; 4335+. (ca. 190 A.D.) τῶν γ΄ [πρεσβ]υτέρων ἱε[ρ]έων [π]ρώτης φυλῆς ; ibid., line st, τῶν € πρεσβυτέρων ἱερέων πενταφυλ]ίας Σοκνοπί αἰου θε]οῦ ; 392 61. (207-208 A.D.), καὶ διὰ τῶν ἱερέων πρεσβυτέρων (here follow the names, partly mutilated) τῶν δ΄. What the col- legiate® relations of these πρεσβύτεροι ἱερεῖς actually were we do not definitely understand ; but thus much is certain, viz., that πρεσβύτεροι occurs here in the technical religious sense of pagan usage in imperial times, which, according to Krebs, goes back to the Ptolemaic period.*
The Papyrus passages are the more important, as no other examples of this usage, so far as we know, have been found in pagan writers. That is to say, indubitable examples. It is true that the πρεσβύτεροι of towns and islands in Asia Minor, mentioned on p. 156, are considered by many investigators, as we have meanwhile learned, to have been a corporation which exercised authority in sacred matters, but this hypothesis is opposed by others®; were it
1The Soknopaios-temple in the Fayyfim, belonging to imperial times, is meant.
2 See the corrected reading in the Supplement, p. 397.
3 They seem always to have formed a college (of 3, 4 or 5 persons).
4 According to Krebs, p. 35, πρεσβύτεροι was thus used—without the addition of fepets—even in the Ptolemaic period [as above, CIG. 4717 2f.].
5 Frinkel, p. 321, in ref. to Perg. 477 (time of Claudius or Nero): “ This and the following Inscription (478, imperial period) prove the existence in
N. 62, 63] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 235
proved, we should thus have two valuable analogies of the early Christian πρεσβύτεροι. But, nevertheless, the word in the passages from Asia Minor would be used rather in its original signification, and not in the more special sense which finally developed into the idea of priest. In the Papyri it has this sense—or rather shows a _ tendency towards this sense. We do not assert that it means “priest ἡ: that is impossible in view of the following ἱερεύς. What is of importance for the history of the word is the circumstance that it was used as a distinctive appellation of priests in particular. The transformation of the early Christian elders into the Catholic priests, so extremely important in its consequences,! was of course facilitated by the fact that there already existed elder priests or priestly elders, of whom both the designation and the institution were but waiting for admission into a church which was gradually becoming secularised.?
προφήτης.
“ΠῊ6 higher classes of the priesthood [in Egypt], ac- cording to the decree of Kanopus (1. 3) and Rosetta (1. ὁ), were, in ascending scale, the ἱερογραμματεῖς, the πτεροφόροι, the ἱεροστολισταί (πρὸς τὸν στολισμὸν τῶν θεῶν), the προ- φῆται, and the ἀρχιερεῖς.᾽᾿ ὃ In Roman times we meet with a προφήτης Yovyou θ[ εοῦ μεγάλ]ου μεγάλου, BU. 149 3:. (Fay- yim, 2nd-3rd cent. a.D.). ‘‘ This ‘ prophet’ receives for his work 344 drachmas and half an obol annually—a salary from
Pergamus of a Gerousia, for which institution, particularly frequent in Roman Asia Minor, reference may be made to the careful discussion of Menadier (Hphesu, p. 48 ff.) and its continuation by Hicks (Greek Inscriptions in the Brit. Mus., iii. 2, p. 74 ff.). According to these, the Gerousia is to be thought of as an official body whose authority lay in sacred affairs. Otherwise Mommsen, Rim. Gesch. 5, 326.”
1A. Harnack, Lehrbuch der Dogmengeschichte, i.? (Freiburg, 1888), p. 385 [Eng. Trans., ii., p. 131]: ‘“‘One might perhaps say that the internal form of the churches was altered by no other development so thoroughly as by that which made priests of the bishops and elders”’.
2 Cf. the similar circumstances in regard to προφήτης; Pp. 236. °F. Krebs, Agyptische Priester unter rimischer Herrschaft in the Zeitschrift fiir dgypt. Sprache und Alterthumskunde, xxxi. (1893), p. 36.
256 _ BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 63, 64
the smallness of which we may perhaps infer that the duties of this office were not his chief occupation.”' In BU. 4883¢. (Fayytim, 2nd cent. a.p.), if the restoration be correct, we find a προφήτης of a god Συκατοῖμις. The author knows nothing as to the duties of these Egyptian προφῆται. But the fact that in Egypt? the prophets were priests is sufficiently important for us. It helps us to understand the view held by the Christians in the second century, viz., that ‘‘ the prophets and teachers, as the commissioned preachers of the word, are the priests’’;* we can better understand such a strange saying as Didache 13°, δώσεις τὴν ἀπαρχὴν τοῖς προφή- ταις " αὐτοὶ yap εἰσιν οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς Lu@v—particularly as it was written in the country in which the προφῆται were priests.
Supplementary: An interesting piece of epigraphic evidence for the priestly προφῆται is found on a statue in the collection of Consul-General Loytved at Beirut, which has been published by A. Erman.* The statue comes from Tyre, and represents a worshipper of Osiris, who holds before him the image of his god. The workmanship is altogether Egyptian; the pillar at the back bears an Inscription in small hieroglyphics, which the editor cannot fully make out, but from which he translates inter alia, ‘‘the Prophet... of Osiris,’’ which is meant to signify the person represented. Then, on the right side of the pillar at the back, the following Inscription is roughly scratched :—
SACERDOS: OSIRIM FERENS: IIPO@H////// OSEIPINKOM///////
Z£//|||
1F, Krebs, Agyptische Priester unter rimischer Herrschaft in the Zeit- schrift fiir dgypt. Sprache und Alterthumskunde, xxxi. (1893), p. 36.
2 There were priestly prophets in other places. We doubt indeed, whether, in 7MAe. 888 68. (Rhodes, 1st cent. B.C.) προφατεύσας ἐν τῷ ἄστει καὶ ἐπιλαχὼν ἱερεὺς ᾿Αλίου, the προφατεύσας actually refers to priestly duties. Com- pare, however, the passages in Kaibel, 7GrSJI. Index, p. 740 swb προφήτης.
3 A. Harnack, Lehrbuch der Dogmengeschichte, i?, p. 183 [EKng. Trans., i., p. 214].
4 Hine digyptische Statue aus Tyrus in the Zeitschr, fiir dgypt. Sprache und Alterthumskunde, xxxi. (1893), p. 102.
N. 64, 65] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 237
This is to be read: Sacerdos Osirim ferens. IIpody[tns]} "Ὄσειριν κωμ{ ἀ]ξω[»ν].} ‘
On this Erman remarks as follows: ‘‘ That the super- scription, ‘ Priest who carries Osiris,’ did not come from the dedicator himself is evident, and is also confirmed by the way in which it isapplied. It is more likely that, in Roman times, the votive gifts of the Tyrian temple were furnished with altogether fresh inscriptions, and that, further, for pur- poses of classification, the category under which they were catalogued was marked upon them. In this way the statue, the strange inscription on which was undecipherable, has been made, not quite accurately, to represent a ‘ priest’ in general, taking care of the image of his god.” The present writer does not quite see wherein the want of accuracy lies, since the Greek part of the Inscription speaks of a προφήτης. But be that as it may, it is of interest to us that in this Inscription of Roman times sacerdos is translated by προφή- της, and is itself most probably a translation of the Egyptian word for prophet. We cannot permit ourselves an opinion on the latter point, but it appears to us perfectly possible that the writer of the bilingual Inscription understood the hieroglyphic text: how otherwise should he have rendered sacerdos by προφήτης ἡ ‘The reason, then, for his not translating the Egyptian word for prophet by propheta is either that this word had not yet become naturalised in Latin, or that it did not seem capable of expressing the specific sense of the Egyptian word. The case was very different with προφήτης, the use of which, for a definite class of priests, can be demonstrated in Egypt from Ptole- maic times. If this hypothesis be correct, then our In- scription, in spite of its Phoenician origin, would have to be added to the Egyptian proofs for the existence of the priest-prophets ; if not, it would be evidence for the fact that προφήτης as the designation of a priest is also found in use outside Egypt—or, at least, outside the Egyptian range of ideas,
1 κωμάζων, carrying in the procession. This Inscription is a little remini- scent of the passage from the Leiden Papyri on p. 864.
238 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 65, 66
συμβούλιον.
This (as it appears) rare word is mentioned by New Testament lexica as occurring outside the N. T. in Plu- tarch only. In reference to the unfortunately mutilated passage, Perg. 2543 (Roman period), in which it occurs, Frankel quotes the following note from Mommsen,' which gives what is most likely the oldest example of the word :—
“Tt appears that the word συμβούλιον is, properly speak- ing, not Greek, but is formed in the Graeco-Latin official style, in order to represent the untranslateable consiliwm. It is so found in a document of the year 610 a.v.c. [CIG. 1543 = Dittenberger, Sylloge, 242]. Cf. Plutarch, Rom. 14: ὠνόμαζον δὲ τὸν θεὸν Κῶνσον, εἴτε βουλαῖον ὄντα" κωνσίλιον γὰρ ἔτι νῦν τὸ συμβούλιον καλοῦσι."
The author found the word also in BU. 28814 (reign of Antoninus Pius) κ[α]θημένων ἐν συμβουλίῳ ἐν τῷ Teal Tapio], and 51115 (ca. 200 a.p.”) [ἐν συμβουλείῳ . . .. .. ἐκάθισεν.
σφραγίζω.
In Rom. 1ὅ 8 Paul describes the collection on behalf of Jerusalem which he had gathered among the Gentile Christ- lans aS καρπός: when I have sealed to them this fruit I shall travel to Spain. καρπὸν σφραγίζεσθαι is certainly a very remarkable expression. B. Weiss® sees in it an indication “that Paul is assuring them by personal testimony how love for the mother-church had brought this gift of love to it”. Others, again, follow Theodore of Mopsuestia in thinking that the apostle merely alludes to the regular method of delivering the money to the church at Jerusalem ; so most recently Lipsius: deliver properly into their possession.* We are of opinion that the latter view is confirmed by the Papyri. In BU. 2492 (Fayyaim, 2nd cent. A.D.) Chaire- mon writes to Apollonios, σφράγεισον * τὸ σειτάριον * Kal τὴν κρειθήν *”, seal the wheat and the barley. Here we have quite
1 Hermes, xx., p. 287, note 7. 2 The Papyrus was written about this time; the text itself may be older. 3 Meyer, iv. ὃ (1891), p. 595. 4 HC. ii. 2 (1891), p. 184.
N. 66, 67] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 239
an analogous expression,! which Professor Wilcken, in a letter to the author, explains as follows: seal (the sacks con- taining) the wheat and the barley. The same thing is meant in 15 i. [Fayyim, 197 (?) AD., ὑμᾶς δὲ σφραγῖδαν “ὁ ἐπι- βάζλ]λιν "ὁ ἑκάστῳ ὄνῳ]: Ye shall set your seal upon every ass, ἴ.6., upon the sacks of every ass”. Our conjecture is that the sealing of the sacks of fruit was to guarantee the correctness of the contents. If the fruit 1s sealed, then everything is in order: the sealing is the last thing that must be done prior to delivery. In the hght of this the metaphorical expression used by the Apostle assumes a more definite shape. He will act lke a conscientious merchant. We know well that in his labour of love he did not escape base calumnies ; a sufficient reason for him that he should perform everything with the greater precision.
e tA υἱοθεσία.
This word is one of the few in regard to which the “profane” usage of the Inscriptions is taken into considera- tion in the New Testament lexica. Cremer’, p. 972, observes: “rare in the literature, but more frequent in the Inscriptions”, His examples may be supplemented by in- numerable passages from the pre-Christian Inscriptions of the Islands of the Aigean Sea. Particular references are superfluous.” The word is always found in the formula καθ᾽ υἱοθεσίαν δέ: A., son of B., καθ᾽ νυἱοθεσίαν δέ son of C. The corresponding formula for the adoption of females is κατὰ θυγατροποΐαν ὃ δέ, which occurs seven times. The frequency with which these formulae occur permits of an inference as to the frequency of adoptions, and lets us understand that Paul was availing himself of a generally intelligible figure when he utilised the term υἱοθέσια in the language of religion.
1 BU. 24840 (letter from the same person and to the same as in 249) τὰ ἀμύγδαλα σφραγ(ιζόμενα) might also be added.
2 Cf. the Index of personal names in the [MAe. These Inscriptions have ὑὕοθεσίαν. The formula κατὰ γένεσιν, 1910, 88414 (?) 964 aga, expresses the antithesis to it.
3’ The [MAe. mostly read so; also θυγατροποιΐαν in 646 2.
240 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 68
χάραγμα.
The other beast of Revelation 18", causes!® all, the small and the great, and the rich and the poor, and the free and the bond, ἵνα δῶσιν αὐτοῖς χάραγμα ἐπὶ THs χειρὸς αὐτῶν τῆς δεξιᾶς ἢ ἐπὶ τὸ μέτωπον αὐτῶν, " ἵνα μή τις δύνηται ἀγοράσαι ἢ πωλῆσαι εἰ μὴ ὁ ἔχων τὸ χάραγμα τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ θηρίου ἢ τὸν ἀριθμὸν τοῦ ὀνόματος αὐτοῦ. A recent commentator, W. Bousset,! thinks that the fruitless guessing of exegetes about the χάραγμα proves “that here again there has been adopted from some lost older tradition a feature which no longer accords with the figure before us or its application”’. But one is not entitled to speak of a proof in this connection, even if it were an established fact that the exegetes had sought ‘“fruitlessly’’. One might with equal justification suppose that we have here an allusion to some familiar detail, not as yet known to us, of the circumstances of the imperial period, and the only question is, Which interpretation is the more plausible: the reference to an ancient apocalyptic tradition, or the hypothesis of an allusion to a definite fact in the history of the times? “A cautious mode of investigation will accept the results obtained by reference to contemporary history wherever such reference is unforced— .... . it will recognise genuine proofs and results arrived at by the tradi- tional-historical method; but. where neither is sufficient, it will be content to leave matters undecided—as also the possi- bility of allusions to contemporary events which we do not know. Finally, it will in many cases apply both methods at once.’’ The following attempt to explain the matter is to be understood in the light of these statements of Bousset,? with which the present writer is in absolute agreement.
In his commentary, Bousset rightly repudiates the refer- ence to the stigmatising of slaves and soldiers. One might preferably, he thinks, take the χάραγμα as being a religious protective-mark (Schutzzeichen). Other expositors havethought of the Roman coinage with image and superscription of the Emperor. But these explanations also, he thinks, must be
1 Meyer, xvi. ὅ (1896), p. 427. 2 Der Antichrist, Gottingen, 1895, p. 7.
N. 69] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 241
rejected. The enigma can be solved only by the traditional- historical method which sets the passage in the light of the time-hallowed apocalyptic ideas. ‘‘It is, in fact, the ancient figure of Antichrist that..... has been turned to account in the second half of chap. 13. The legend of Antichrist, how- ever, has it ‘‘that the Antichrist compels the inhabitants of the earth to assume his mark, and that only those who have the mark on forehead and hand may buy bread in times of want. Here we have the explanation of the enigmatic verses land 17.7?
Bousset is certainly well aware that to trace backwards is not to explain.® And yet, should it be successfully de- monstrated that the χάραγμα belonged in some way to the substance of the apocalyptic tradition of ancestral times, our investigation would be substantially furthered thereby. With no little suspense, therefore, the author examined the references which Bousset adduces elsewhere. But the citations there are relatively very late passages at best, in regard to which it seems quite possible, and to the author also probable, that Rev. 18 has rather influenced them. And even if the mark had been borrowed by John, the special characteristics of the passage would still remain unexplained, viz., the fact that the mark embodies the name or the number of the beast,’ that it has some general connection with buying and selling,® and, most important of all, that it has some special reference to the Roman emperor who is signified by the beast. The tradi- tional-historical method is hardly adequate to the elucidation of these three points, and, this being so, the possibility of an
1 Meyer, xvi.*, p. 481. 2 Tbid., p. 482.
5 Cf. Der Antichrist, p. 8: ‘ At the same time Iam quite conscious that in the last resort I do not attain to an understanding of the eschatological- mythological ideas”’.
4 Der Antichrist, p. 132 ff.
> According to Bousset, the mark seems to have been originally a serpent-mark : the reference to the name of the beast was added by the writer of the Apocalypse (Der Antichrist, p. 133). But nothing is added: and therefore in Meyer, xvi.*, p. 432, it is more accurately put that the mark is “changed in meaning”.
5 In the passages cited by Bousset the buying (and selling) is inti- mately connected with the famine.
16
249 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 70, 71
allusion to something in the history of the time, hitherto unknown, presses for consideration.
Now the Papyri put us in a position where we can do justice to this possibility. They inform us of a mark which was commonly used in imperial times,! which
(1) Is connected with the Roman Emperor,
(2) Contains his name (possibly also his effigy) and the year of his reign,
(3) Was necessary upon documents relating to buying, selling, etc., and
(4) Was technically known as χάραγμα.
1. On Papyri of the 1st and 2nd centuries A.D. are often found “traces, now more distinct, now very faint, of a red seal, which, at first sight, resembles a red maculation; but the regular, for the most part concentric, arrangement of the spots shows that they are really traces of written charac- ters’. Butin addition to those seal-impressions on papyrus, which will be discussed presently in greater detail, there has also been preserved a circular stamp-plate of soft lime- stone having a diameter of 5°5 centimetres and 8. thick- ness of 2°8 centimetres. On the face of the stamp are vestiges of the red pigment. The plate is now in the Museum at Berlin, and a fac-simile was issued by F. Krebs in con- nection with BU. 183. We are enabled, by the kind permission of the authorities of the Imperial Museum, to give here a reproduction of the fac-simile.
The legend, in uncial characters, reversed of course, is arranged in a circle, and runs as follows :—
L λε΄ Καίσαρος, 1.6., in the 35th year® of Caesar (= 5-6 A.D.).
1 Whether the use of this imperial χάραγμα is found elsewhere is. unknown to the author. But he is of opinion that it is not; otherwise it would be inconceivable that Mommsen, who finds in John 131*f. an allusion to the imperial money (Rémische Geschichte, v.*, Berlin, 1894, p. 522), should not have lighted upon the author’s conjecture. Wessely also, in his issue of PHR., treats the matter as something new.
2 Wessely in ref. to PHR. xi., p. 11.
3 L is the common abbreviation for ἔτους.
N. 71, 72] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 243
In the middle, surrounded by the circle of these letters, there are also the letters yp, which we do not understand. Krebs resolves them thus: γρ(αφεῖον) ; in that case the seal must also have contained the names of the authorities.

IMPERIAL SEAL oF AvuGusTus. BERLIN MusEUM.
It was with such plates that the imperial seals! which have been more or less distinctly preserved on some Papyrus documents, were impressed. The following instances have become known to us :—
(a) PER. 1. (Fayyim, 83-84 a.p.), a bill of sale, has endorsed on it the remains of two red seals of which the words [Avt ]oxp[atopos| and Ζομ[ιτιανοῦ), besides other traces of writing, can still be recognised.
(Ὁ) BU. 183 (Fayytum, 26th April, 85 4.D.), a document about the arrangement of the property and inheritance of a married couple, has an endorsement of three almost wholly obliterated lines by the same hand that wrote the text of the document, and two impressions of a seal in red ink; diameter 7°8 centimetres, length of the letters ΟἿ centimetre. The characters (uncial) in a circular line, are as follows :—
L δ΄ Αὐτοκράτορος Καίσαρος Δομιτιανοῦ Σεβαστοῦ Γερμανικοῦ.
1 We have found only imperial seals in the Papyri.
244 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 72, 73
(c) PER. xi. (Fayyim, 108 a.p.), an agreement regarding the sharing of two parts of a house, is a specially finely preserved copy which Wessely has issued in fac-simile.t “ On the back is the red stamp, circular, and having a diameter of 9°7 centimetres; close to the outer edge there is a circular line, then, inside this, a circle formed by the letters (each 1 centimetre in length) :—
L ,Α Αὐτοκράτορος Καίσαρος Népova Τραιανοῦ.
“Within this, again, is a smaller circle, which consists of the letters (beginning under the L) :—
Σεβαστοῦ Γερμανικοῦ Δακικοῦ,
and, lastly, in the middle, the bust of the emperor, looking to the right. ‘‘ Under the seal there is written in black ink :— pap” ceo” (Μάρων σεσημείωμαι).᾽"
(d) PER. clxx. (Fayyim, reign of Trajan), a bill of sale, bears on the back the red seal, of which about a third is pre- served, and of which there can still be read, in the outer circle :—
[Avr loxpatopos Καίσαρος N[épova Tpacavod], in the inner :— [Σεβασ]τοῦ Γερμανικοῦ.
2. All these imperial seals, including that of Augustus, have this in common, viz., that they contain the name of the emperor; one may assume with certainty, from the analogy of those that are preserved in their completeness, that those which are mutilated also originally contained the year of his reign. One seal has also the effigy of the emperor: how far this may be the case, or may be conjectured, in regard to the others cannot be made out from the reproductions which
1 The author applied, March 15, 1897, to the directors of the Imperial and Royal Printing Establishment at Vienna with the request to lend him the cast of this fac-simile for his book. The directors, to their great regret, could not grant this request, ‘‘as the editors of the work Corpus Papyrorum Raineri are unable, on principle, to give their consent to it”. [Reply of 22nd
March. ]
N. 73] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 245
have been issued. At all events, the seal of Augustus bears no effigy.
3. As to the purpose of the seal there can hardly be any doubt. Wessely' thinks indeed that one might ‘‘take it to be a credential that the material written upon was pro- duced in the imperial manufactory; or to be the credential of an autograph document”. But, in our opinion, the former alternative cannot be entertained. The seal in PER. xi., for instance, is much too large for the factory-mark of the Papyrus; so considerable a space of the valuable material would surely not have been from the first rendered unfit for use by stamping. And there is yet another reason. So far as the date of the preserved seals can still be made out, it corresponds to the year of the particular document. Now, if the seal be a factory-mark, this would be a remark- able coincidence. It is rather intended to be the guarantee of an autograph document. It is affixed to a contract by the competent authorities, making the document legally valid. This hypothesis is confirmed by the under-mentioned copy of a similar document: on it there is no seal, but the legend is faithfully copied on the margin. The seal, then, belongs to the document as such, not to the papyrus.
Looking now at the stamped documents with respect to their contents, we find that in five instances (including the under-mentioned copy) there are three bills of sale or pur- chase. The other two documents are in contents closely allied to these. Wessely” has already called special atten- tion to this in regard to the deed of partition; but BU. 183 also relates to a similar matter.’
4. We are indebted to a fortunate coincidence for the knowledge of the official name of this imperial seal. PER.
1 Τὴ connection with PHR. xi., Ὁ. 37.
2 In connection with PER. xi., p. 34.
3 We are of opinion that, by a more exact examination of the frag- ments of bills of sale and similar documents of the lst and 2nd centuries,
so far as their originals are extant, we might discover traces of a seal in other instances.
246 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 74, 75
iv. is the copy of a bill of sale from the Fayytim, belonging to the 12th year of the Emperor Claudius (52-53 a.p.). It consists of three parts, viz., the actual substance of the agree- ment, the procuratorial signature, and the attestation by the γραφεῖον, an authority whom Wessely describes as the ‘‘oraphische Registeramt’’. Each of these three parts is prefaced by a note stating it to be a copy, thus: ἀντίγραφον oixovouias! linei, ἀντίγραφον ὑπογραφῆς line 80; finally, on the left margin, running vertically, ἀντίγραφον χαράγματος. Wessely translates ‘‘ copy of the signature,” but the “‘ signa- ture,’ or rather the necessary stamping, of the original has been effected precisely by means of the imperial seal. This is supported by the wording as copied :—
L [JB Τιβερίου Κλαυδίου Καίσαρος Σεβαστοῦ Γερμανικοῦ
«Αὐτοκράτορος.
This is exactly the legend whose form is made known to us by such of the original seals as have been preserved. The term χάραγμα suits it excellently. In the lines which follow we must needs recognise the manuscript note of the γραφεῖον, placed below the seal, such as we find in PER. xi., and most likely in BU. 183 also. He adds the day of the month, μηνὸς Καισαρεί(ου) ιδ΄, and the designation of the attesting authority, ἀναγ(έγραπται) διὰ τοῦ ἐν «Ηρακλείᾳ γραφείου.
To sum up: χάραγμα is the name of the imperial seal, giving the year and the name of the reigning emperor (possibly also his effigy), and found on bills of sale and similar documents of the 1st and 2nd centuries.
It is not asserting too much to say that in this ascer- tained fact we have something to proceed upon. If the beast be correctly interpreted as referring to a Roman emperor, which the author does not doubt in the least, then, from
 olkovoula = document is often found in the Papyri.
*The supposition that the day of the month also belonged to the seal is in itself improbable, as, in that case, the plate must have been altered daily ; it is further opposed by the fact that the preserved seals only give the year.
N. 75, 67] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 247
what we now know of the emperor’s χάραγμα, we can very well understand the χάραγμα of the beast. The χάραγμα of the Apocalypse is not, of course, wholly identical with its contemporary prototype. The seer acted with a free hand ; he has it that the mark is impressed on forehead or hand, and he gives the nwmber a new meaning. It is in this point that ancient (apocalyptic ?) tradition may possibly have made its influence felt. But it has only modified; the characteristic, not to say charagmatic, features of the proto- type can be recognised without difficulty.
χειρόγραφον.
The technical signification bond, certificate of debt, authen- ticated in reference to Col. 2' by Clavis? and Thayer in Plutarch and Artemidorus only, is very common in the Papyri. Many of the original χειρόγραφα, indeed, have been preserved ; some of these are scored through and thus cancelled (e.g. BU. 179, 272, PER. ccxxix). The following passages from Fayyim Papyri may be cited for the word: PER. 1. 29 (83-84 A.D.), xili.3 (110-111 a.p.), BU. 505. 16.18 (115 A.D.), 6912 (120 A.D.), 272416 (138-189 a.p.), 3003.12 (148 A.D.), 80117 (157 A.D.), 179 (reign of Antoninus Pius), PER. 1x. 6.9 (Hermopolis, 271 4.D.).
χωρίζομαι.
As in 1 Cor. 7!" , a technical expression for divorce also in the Fayyim Papyri.2 In the marriage-contracts there are usually stated conditions for the possibility of separation ; these are introduced by the formula ἐὰν δὲ [οἱ γαμοῦντες] χωρίζωνται ἀπ᾽ ἀλλήλων ; thus BU. 2516 (81 A.D., restoration certain), 2527 (98 a.D.), PER. xxiv.27 (136 4.D.), xxvil.ie (190 A.D.).
1 Hiven if all the imperial seals were as large as that of Trajan in PHAR, xi., which, with its diameter of 9.7 centimetres, could find sufficient room only on the brows of thinkers and the hands of the proletariat, yet our hypo- thesis would lose nothing in probability; surely we do not wish to control the seer with the centimetre rod. But there was manifestly no prescribed standard diameter for the seal; cf. that on BU. 183, or even the original stamp of Augustus; a seal of its size could quite well have found room on forehead or hand.
2? Examples are also to be found in other places.
248 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 75, 76
5. PHRASES AND HKORMULAE.
>’ lol > lA EK τῶν τεσσάρων ανεέμῶων.
One might imagine the formula (LXX Zech. 11°, Mark 13°", Matt. 24 51) to be a mere imitation of the corresponding Hebrew one. But it occurs also in PER. cxv.6 (Fayyim, Qnd cent. A.D.) [γείτο]νες ἐκ τεσσάρων ἀνέμων ; notwithstand- ing the mutilation of the document, there can be no doubt that the four cardinal points are meant.
ἀξίως τοῦ θεοῦ.
In 1 Thess. 212 we have περιπατεῖν ἀξίως τοῦ θεοῦ, in Col. 1” περιπατῆσαι ἀξίως τοῦ κυρίου εἰς πᾶσαν ἀρεσκείαν, in 8 Φοῃη προπέμψας ἀξίως τοῦ θεοῦ (cf. possibly Wisdom 3° καὶ εὗρεν αὐτοὺς ἀξίους ἑαυτοῦ [= θεοῦ) and Matt. 10 5). The formula was a very popular one in Pergamus (and doubt- less also in other localities). In Perg. 2487 (142-141 B.c.), Athenaios, a priest of Dionysus and Sabazius, is extolled as συ[ν]τετελεκότος Ta ἱερὰ. . . . εὐσεβῶς [μ]ὲγ καὶ ἀξίως τοῦ θεοῦ; in Perg. 521 (after 136 A.D.), ἱερασαμένην ἀξίως τῆς θεοῦ καὶ τῆς πατρίδος, of a priestess of Athena, and in Perg. 48539 (beginning of Ist cent. A.D.), an ἀρχιβούκολος is honoured διὰ τὸ εὐσεβῶς καὶ ἀξίως τοῦ Καθηγεμόνος Διονύσου προΐστασθαι τῶν θείων μυστηρίων. In Perg. 522 τα. (8rd cent. A.D.) two priestesses of Athena are similarly commemorated as ἱερασαμένων ...... ἐνδόξως καὶ ἐπιφανῶς κατὰ τὸ ἀξίωμα καὶ τὸ μέγεθος τῆς θεοῦ. The Inscription of Sestos (Wiener Studien, 1., p. 33 ff., ca. 120 B.c.) has, in line s7, λαμπρὰν ποιησά- μενος τὴν ὑποδοχὴν καὶ ἀξίαν τῶν θεῶν Kai τοῦ δήμου.
ἐμμένω (ἐν) πᾶσι τοῖς γεγραμμένοις.
LXX Deut. 2735 ἐπικατάρατος πᾶς ἄνθρωπος ὃς οὐκ ἐμμένει ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς λόγοις τοῦ νόμου τούτου is quoted ‘freely ”’ by Paul in Gal. 8.12 thus: ἐπικατάρατος πᾶς ὃς οὐκ ἐμμένει ἐν πᾶσιν τοῖς γεγραμμένοις ἐν τῷ βιβλίῳ τοῦ νόμου. Certainly an immaterial alteration, such as any one may unconsciously make in a quotation from memory. We should not need to
1 Cf., if the restoration be correct, Perg. 223 (ca. 156 B.c.) ἀναστίρεφο- μένην καλ[ῶς] καὶ εὐσεβῶς καὶ a[tiws τῆς θεᾶς], said of Bito,a priestess of Athena.
N. 76, 77] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 249
trouble any further about it, were it not that the Papyri indicate how Paul may have come to make this particu- lar insignificant change. In the deed of partition PER. xi. 238, (Fayytim, 108 A.D.) we read ἐνμενέτωσαν [oi] ὁμολο- yourres ...2... ἐν τοῖς ἑκουσίως ὡμολογη μένοις] καὶ διειρη- μένοις. Here we have a legal formula familiar in the official style of such documents, which occurs earlier in a similar form in the Turin Papyrus 8 (2nd cent. A.D.): ἐμμένει» δὲ ἀμφοτέρους ἐν τοῖς πρὸς ἑαυτοὺς διωμολογημένοις " The formula varies as to its verb, but preserves the constancy of its form—intelligible in the case of a legal expression—by the fact that ἐμμένειν, with or without ἐν, is followed by the dative of a participle, mostly in the plural. It so runs in PER. ccxxiv.st. (Fayytim, 5-6 A.D.) ἐνμένειν ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς γεγε[νημένοις κατὰ τὴ]ν γραφὴν τῆς ὁμολ(ογίας ἣν συνγέ- γραμμαί σοι. Note here the addition of a new word, πᾶσι. And, finally, let us read BU. 6006 (Fayyim, 2nd-3rd cent. A.D.) ἐνμένω πᾶσι ταῖς προγεγραμέν ales “ὁ [ἐν] τολαῖς, a form of which the biblical quotation of Paul, with its distinctive variation, is undoubtedly reminiscent. In these circum- stances, the Apostle may be supposed to have continued the biblical ἐμμένει ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς... by a participle, unconsciously adopting the cadence of the legal formula. We are un- aware whether this form of expression is to be found elsewhere, or outside Egypt; its unquestionably formulaic character speaks for its having belonged—albeit in mani- fold variation—to the more widely known material of the language. Moreover, the use of a legal form of expression is particularly easy to understand in the case of Paul.*
καθὼς γέγραπται, etc.
The authorities given on p. 119 f. for the legal character of the formula of quotation καθὼς (καθώπερ) γέγραπται can still be largely added tot. In IMAe. 761 4: (Rhodes, 3rd cent.
1 As the author has not the Turin Papyri by him, he quotes according to Corp. Papp. Rainert, i. 1, p. 12.
2 ὁμολογία = contract. 3 See p. 107 f.
4 It was remarked on p. 114, note 3, that the formula is also found with- out this technical meaning. As examples of this we have the ἀναγέγραπται
250 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 78
B.C.) we have καθὰ καὶ ἐν τοῖς νόμοις γέγραπται. In the decree Perg. 25135 (2nd cent. B.c.), with reference to a pas- sage immediately preceding, there occur the words καθάπερ yéyparta ; similarly, in the documents BU. 2529 (Fayyam, 98 A.D.) καθὰ γέγραπται, and PER. cliv.u (Fayyim, 180 A.D.) καθὼς γ[ ἐγρίαπται. There may also be added καθότι προγέ- ypamrat) BU. 189 (Rayyum, 7 Δ), and ΕΝ ava (Fayytm, 52-53 a.D.); καθώς vroyéeyparta, relating to an oracle quoted later, in the Inscription of Sidyma No. ὅθ πε} (post-Hadrianic) ; καθὰ διαγέγραπται in an Inscrip- tion from Cos? (date ?)
Other formulae of quotation used by the New Testament writers are vouched for by the legal language: κατὰ τὰ προγεγραμμένα PER. iv.2 (Fayydm, 52-53 A.D.) cf. κατὰ TO γεγραμμένον 2 Cor. 4%; [κατὰ τὴ]ν γραφήν, with re- ference to a contract, PER. ccxxiv.s (Fayyam, 5-6 A.D.), and κατὰ γραφάς, with reference to the laws, BU. 13610 (135 A.D.), α΄. κατὰ Tas γραφάς 1 Cor. 155", and κατὰ τὴν γραφήν James 2°.
/ TO γνήσιον.
2 Cor. 8° τὸ τῆς ὑμετέρας ἀγάπης γνήσιον : cf. Inscription of Sestos (Wiener Studien, 1., p. 33 ff., ca. 120 B.c.), linez, πρὸ
, L \ \ \ , ΄ὕ Nes) ΄ πλείστου θέμενος TO προς Τὴν πατρίδα γνήσιον και EKTEVES.
δέησιν, δεήσεις ποιοῦμαι.
δέησιν ποιοῦμαι (Phil. 14 of supplication) is used quite generally for request in BU. 18017 (Fayyam, 172 A.D.) δικαίαν d€[no |v ποιούμενος ; on the other hand, δεήσεις ποιοῦμαι, as in Luke 5,1 Tim. 2!, of supplication, also in Pap. Par. 69
of Josephus (references in Hans Driiner, Untersuchungen tiber Josephus, Thesis, Marburg, 1896, pp. 54 note 1, and 85), Arrian (cf. Wilcken, Philologus, 1111. [1894], p. 117 f.), and most likely of other authors as well. Iam indebted to a kind communication of Dr. Hans Driiner for the information that Josephus frequently employs ἀναγέγραπται for O.T. references also, while he certainly uses γέγραπται very seldom for these; γέγραπται in 6. Ap. ii. 18 refers to a non-biblical quotation.
1 Benndorf and Niemann, Reisen in Lykien und Karen, i., Vienna, 1894, p. 77; for the date see p. 75.
2 Hermes xvi. (1881), p. 172, note; cited by Frinkel, p. 16.
Ν. 79] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 251
ii, (EKlephantiné, 232 a.d.) ἔνθα σπονδάς τε καὶ δε]ήσεις ποιησάμενος."
δεξιὰν δίδωμι.
In Perg. 268 C (98 B.c.) the Pergamenians offer them- selves as peace-makers in the quarrel between the cities of Sardis and Ephesus: they send a mediator (line 1+): [τὸν παρακα]λέσοντα δοῦναι τ[ὰἸ]ς χεῖρας ἡμῖν els σύλλυσιν)" On this Frankel observes, p. 201: “‘‘ to give the hands towards an agreement (to be brought about by us)’. I have not found any other example of this use (corresponding to the German) of the phrase δοῦναι τὰς χεῖρας. We have here a case where the elucidation of the Inscriptions can be to some extent assisted by the sacred text; the expression give the hand or hands* is very common in the Greek Bible—though in the form δεξιὰν (or δεξιὰς) διδόναι: 1 Macc. 6%, 11° ©, Tao. 2 Wace. [2 1 13", Gal. 2° (Cekias cdwcay . 2 κοινωνίας ; cf. δεξιὰν (or δεξιὰς) λαμβάνειν 1 Macc. 11%, 13”, 2 Macc. 12", 144 Then exegetes have also adduced clas- sical analogies; most exhaustively Joannes Dougtzus, Analecta sacra, 2nd ed., Amsterdam, 1694, Part 11.,ὄ p. 123. Clavis*, p. 88, cites only Xen. Anab. 1, 6, 6; 2, 5,3; Joseph. Antt. 18, 19 [should be 9], 3.
els TO διηνεκές.
Apart from the Epistle to the Hebrews, authenticated in Appian, B. civ. 1,4; found in [MAe. 786 τὸ (Rhodes, imperial period): τετειμημένος ““ ἐς τὸ dvevexés*”, also in Apollodorus of Damascus, 42.
Uy \ ἔθος, κατὰ TO ἔθος.
The word is used in the Βαγγάμη Papyri almost entirely for law, ritus, in the narrower sense, as often in Luke and
1 The citation is made from the issue of this Papyrus (from Notices et extraits, xviii. 2, pp. 390-399) by Wilcken in Philologus, liii. (1894), p. 82. 2 The restorations are certain.
3 With this we must not confound ἐκδιδόναι τὴν χεῖρα, BU. 40516 (Fayyim, 348 a.p.) where χείρ means manuscript, document.
4 See also Grimm on 2 Macc. 4%, HApAT. iv. (1857), p. 93.
952. BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 79, 80
Acts. Note especially the formula κατὰ τὸ ἔθος (Luke 1°, 24): BU. 25017 (reign of Hadrian) καθαρὸς κατὰ τὸ ἔθος, 1315 (Qnd-3rd cent. A.D.) and 9615 (2nd half of 3rd cent. A.D.) κατὰ τὰ Ρωμαίων ἔθη, 347 1.17, 11.15 (171 A.D.) and 8212 (185 A.D.) περιτμηθῆναι κατὰ τὸ ἔθος (cf. Acts 151 περιτμηθῆτε τῷ. ἔθει Mwiicéws). ἑτοίμως ἔχω.
Manifold authorities for the phrase in connection with 2 Cor. 12%, 1 Pet. 4°, Acts 211°; it is found also in the Fayyam documents of the reign of Marcus Aurelius, BU. 24027 and 80[= 446]i7. The construction can be made out in the latter passage only; as in all the New Testament passages it is followed by the infinitive.
τοῦ θεοῦ θέλοντος, etc.
Similar pagan formulae have long since been referred to in connection with the New Testament passages. The Fayyum Papyri reveal how widespread its use must have been, even in the lower strata of society. With τοῦ θεοῦ θέλοντος in Acts 187! is connected τῶν θε[ὧ]ν θελόντων BU. 4231s (2nd cent. A.D., a soldier’s letter to his father) ; 6154+ (2nd cent. A.D., private letter) ἐπυγνοῦσα ὅτι θεῶν θελόντων διεσώθης, used in reference to the past; similarly in linezit.; further, θεῶν δὲ βουλομένων 248111 (Qnd cent. A.D., private letter), 24913 (2nd cent. A.D., private letter). With ἐὰν ὁ κύριος ἐπιτρέψη 1 Cor. 16", ἐάνπερ ἐπιτρέπῃ ὁ θεός Heb. 6°, compare θεῶν ἐπιτρεπόν τ]ων 451 101. (1st-2nd cent. A.D., private letter), also τῆς τύχης ἐπιτρεπούσης 248154. (2nd cent. A.D., private letter). Allied to καθὼς [ὁ θεὸς] ἠθέλησεν 1 Cor. 1218, 15% is ὡς ὁ θεὸς ἤθελεν in BU. 27u (Qnd-3rd cent. A.D., private letter). It is a specially significant fact that it 1s precisely in private letters that we find the specified examples of the use of these formulae.
ἐκ τοῦ μέσου αἴρω. Thayer, p. 402, cites Plut. De Curios. 9, Is. 57, 2 in con- nection with Col. 213, The phrase is used in BU. 388 i1. 22.
1 This formula often occurs in the PER. also.
Ν. 81] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 253
(Fayyim, 2nd-3rd cent. 4.D.) like e medio tollo in the proper sense. ἀπὸ τοῦ νῦν.
This formula, employed in 2 Cor. 51°, as also often by Luke (Gospel, and Acts 18°), is very common in the Fayyim legal documents. We find it in the following combinations : ἀπὸ τοῦ νῦν ἐπὶ τὸν ἅπαντα χρόνον PER. ww.9.17 (52-53 A.D.), xi.6 (108 a.D.), BU. 35019 (reign of Trajan), 193 11. u (136 A.D.) ; ἀπὸ Tov νῦν εἰς τὸν ἀεὶ χρόνον 2825 (after 175 A.D.) ; [ἀπ]ὸ τοῦ viv ἐπὶ τὸν ἀεὶ καὶ ἅπαντα [χρόνον] 4569 (348 A.D.); also standing by itself, ἀπὸ τοῦ νῦν 15314 (152 A.D.) and 139 (289 A.D.).
A corresponding form, péyp[e] τ[οὔ] viv (cf. ἄχρι τοῦ νῦν Rom. 8”, Phil. 15), is found in BU. 2569 (Fayyaim, reign of Antoninus Pius).
κατ᾽ ὄναρ.
The references for this phrase, as found in Matt. 1 "Ὁ, Q 128 19.22, 9719, cannot be supplemented by Perg. 357 ὃ (Roman times) [κ]ατ᾽ ὄναρ or IMAe. 97941. (Carpathus, 3rd cent, A.D.) κατὰ ὄναρ; in these cases the phrase does not mean i a dream, but in consequence of a dream, like κατ᾽ ὄνειρον in Perg. 327 (late Roman ἢ).
παραίτιος ἀγαθῶν.
In the letter of Lysias to the Jews, 2 Macc. 11”, it 1s said καὶ εἰς TO λοιπὸν πειράσομαι παραίτιος ὑμῖν ἀγαθῶν γενέσθαι. Similarly in Ep. Arist. p. 672 (Schm.) we have ὡς ἂν μεγάλων ἀγαθῶν παραίτιοι γεγονότες. The formula is often found in the Inscriptions. In reference to Perg. 246 δε: (decree of the city of Elaia in honour of Attalus u11., ca. 150 B.C.) [ἀ]εί τινος [ἀ]γα[θ]οῦ παραίτ[ εἾον γίνεσθαι αὐτόν, Frankel, p. 159, observes: ‘‘The phrase was received as a formula into the official Greek of the Romans: so a quaes- tor’s letter to the Letaeans, 118 B.c., in Dittenberger, Sylloge 247, 44f.; two letters, from Caesar and Octavian,
1 Cf. Frankel, p. 55.
254 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 81, 82
to the Mitylenians, Sitzwngsber. d. Berl. Akad. 1889, pp. 960, 965. Elsewhere also, 6.4. in Dittenberger, 252, 2; 280, 23”. IMAe. 10321 (Carpathus, 2nd cent. B.C.) παραίτιος γεγόνει Tas σωτηρ[[]ας should also be compared.
παρέχομαι ἐμαυτόν.
Clavis*, p. 340, finds examples of this reflexive phrase (Tit. 2”) only in Xen. Cyr. 8, 1, 39; Thayer, p. 488, adds Joseph. ὁ. Ap. 2,15, 4. It occurs also in [MAe. 10326 (Car- pathus, 2nd cent. B.C.) ἀνέγκλητον αὑτὸν παρέσχηται, and Lebas, Asie 4096 (Mylasa, 1st cent. B.c.), χρήσιμον ἑαυτὸν TApEecynTat.'
παρίστημι θυσίαν.
In reference to Rom. 12! B. Weiss? rejects the sacri- ficial meaning of to present, lay down (the sacrifice wpon the altar), for παριστάναι, as the word “‘ most probably occurs in Greek in this sense ’’—here follow the references—‘ but it is certainly not . . . in any way a standing technical term in the Ο. T.”; it is to be taken as to place at one’s disposal. The present writer has two objections to this view. For one thing he cannot see wherein the two interpretations differ ; even if the latter be preferred, it yet embraces, in this very combination παριστάναι θυσίαν, the meaning of the former. And, again, he cannot understand how a form of expression used by the Apostle Paul can be set up as something to be contrasted with Greek.
The references given by Weiss for the usage of the word in Greek can be supplemented by Perg. 24617. 43 (decree of the city of Elaia in honour of Attalus IIL, ca. 150 B.c.) παραστα- θείσης θυσίας, 256 14. 21 (mperial period) παρασταθῆναι [θ]υσίαν αὐτῷ, or [ἀφ᾽ oli [aly . . παριστῇ τὴν θυσί[αἹν.
μετὰ πάσης προθυμίας.
With Acts 1171} οἵτινες ἐδέξαντο τὸν λόγον μετὰ πάσης προθυμίας of. Perg. 13301. (oath of allegiance of the mercen-
1 This passage is quoted from Frankel, p. 186, who also refers to the active παρασχόντα χρήσιμον ἑαυτὸν τῇ πατρίδι, CIG. 2771 i. τὸ (Aphrodisias), and
would restore Perg. 25315 in a similar way. 2 Meyer, iv. ὃ (1891), p. 512.
N. 82, 83] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 255
aries of King Eumenes L, soon after 263 A.D.) [παρ]έξομαι δὲ καὶ τὴν [ἄλλην χρείαν evvows καὶ atrpodalc]ila}ras [με]τὰ πάσης προθυμ[ί]ας εἰς δύναμιν εἶναι τὴν ἐμήν. The idiom will, without doubt, be found elsewhere.
ἐκ συμφώνου.
As in 1 Cor. 7°, the formula occurs in the following Fayytiim documents: BU. 446 [= 80]1s (reign of Marcus Aurelius) κ[α]θὼς ἐκ συνφώνου ὑπηγόρευσαν, PER. exci.» (2nd cent. A.D.) [κ]Ἰαθὼς ἐξυμφώνου “ ὑπηγόρευσαν, and cxcvii.s (2nd cent. A.D.) cadeas * éEuudovov* am[......... ] ὑπηγ[ό- pevaay |.
οὐχ ὁ τυχών.
For extraordinary, asin 3 Macc. 87, Acts 19", 283, the phrase occurs also in BU. 36 [cf. 486]9 (Fayyam, 2nd-3rd cent. A.D.) ὕβριν οὐ τὴν τυχοῦσαν συνετελέσαντο and in an earlier Inscription from Ptolemais in Egypt, of the time of Kuergetes, Bulletin de correspondance hellénique, xxi. (1897), p. 190.
οἱ ἐν ὑπεροχῆ ὄντες.
Hitherto noted in 1 Tim. 2? only; οἵ. 2 Macc. 3" ἀνδρὸς ἐν ὑπεροχῇ κειμένου. Already in Perg. 252” (early Roman period, after 133 B.c.), we find τῶν ἐν ὑπεροχῆ ὄντων, pro- bably used generally of persons of consequence.
φίλανδρος καὶ φιλότεκνος.
In regard to Tit. 24 τὰς νέας φιλάνδρους εἶναι, φιλοτέκνους, v. Soden! observes, ‘‘ both expressions here only,” and also in the last edition of Meyer (xi.° [1894], p. 882) they are described as “ dar. Xey.,”” although both are already given in the Clavis as occurring elsewhere. More important than the correction of this error, however, is the ascertained fact that the two words must have been current in this very combina- tion. Already in Clavis*? we find cited for it Plut. Mor., p. 769 C. To this may be added an epitaph from Pergamus, Perg. 604 (about the time of Hadrian), which, on account of its simple beauty, is given here in full :—
1 HC. iii. 1 (1891), p. 209.
256 BIBLE STUDIES. ΓΝ. 83, 84
᾿Ιούλιος Βάσσος ᾽Οτακιλίᾳ Πώλλῃ τῇ γλυκυτάτῃ [γ]υναικί, φιλάνδρ[ ῳ] καὶ φιλοτέκνῳ, συνβιωσάσῃ ἀμέωπτως ἔτη λ΄.
An Inscription of the imperial period, from Paros, CIG. 23841, similarly extols a wife as φίλανδρον καὶ φιλόπαιδα. We need no evidence to prove that precisely a combination of this kind could readily become popular.
TO αὐτὸ φρονεῖν.
This formula and others of similar formation which are current in the writings of the Apostle Paul have been found in Herodotus and other writers.2, The epitaph 1146. 149 (Rhodes, 2nd cent. B.c.), in which it is said of a married couple, ταὐτὰ λέγοντες ταὐτὰ φρονοῦντες ἤλθομεν τὰν ἀμέτρη- τον ὁδὸν εἰς ᾿Αἴδαν, permits of the supposition that it was familiarly used in popular speech.
6. RaRER WorDs, MEANINGS AND CONSTRUCTIONS.
ἄδολος.
In reference to 1 Pet. 2° ὡς ἀρτιγέννητα βρέφη τὸ λογικὸν ἄδολον γάλα ἐπιποθήσατε, Εἰ. Kiihl*® observes that the second attribute ἄδολος is not meant to apply to the meta- phorical γάλα, but only to the word of God as symbolised by it. But BU. 2901 (Fayyim, 150 a.p.) makes it probable that this adjective could quite well be applied to milk; the word is there used, alongside of καθαρός, of wnadulterated wheat. Thus the word need not have been chosen as merely relating to the meaning of the metaphor, nor, again, as merely referring to πάντα δόλον in verse}.
1 Citation from Frinkel, p. 134. 2 Cf. A. H. Franke on Phil. 2? (Meyer, ix.® [1886], p. 84). * Meyer, xii. ® (1897), p. 136.
Ν. 84, 85] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 257
ἀμετανόητος.
According to Clavis*, p. 21, found only in Lucian, Abdic. 11; Thayer, p. 32, adds Philo, De Praem. et Poen. § 3 (M. p. 410). In PER. cexvi.s (Fayyim, Ist-2nd cent. a.p.), the word is used, passively, of a sale (κυρίαν καὶ βεβαίαν καὶ ἀμετανόητον).
ἀπόκριμα.
For this manifestly very rare word in 2 Cor. 1°, Clavis 5, p. 43, gives only the reference Joseph. Antt. 14, 10, 6; Thayer, p. 63, supplements this by Polyb. Eacpt. Vat. 12, 26°, 1; in both passages an official decision is meant. The word occurs in the same sense in the Inscription (particularly worthy of consideration by reason of its proximity in time to the Pauline passage) IM/Ae. 24 (Rhodes, 51 A.D.), in which Ta εὐκταιότατα ἀποκρίματα certainly relates to favourable decisions of the Emperor Claudius.
ἀρκετός.
Outside the N. T. only authenticated hitherto in Chry- sippus (in Athen. 3, 79, p. 113 δ); is also found in the Fayyim Papyri BU. 531 ii.% (2nd cent. A.D.) and 335 (2nd-3rd cent. A.D.).
ἀσπάζομαι. With the meaning pay one’s respects (Acts 2 13, Joseph.
Antt. 1, 19, 5; 6, 11, 1), also in the Fayytim Papyri BU. 347 1.3, 11.2 (171 A.D.) and 248 12 (Qnd cent. A.D.).
βαστάζω.
Of the special meaning! furtim sepono in John 12° the Fayytim Papyri yield a number of fresh examples: BU. 361 il.10 (end of 2nd cent. A.D.), 4610 (193 a.D.), 1578 (2nd-3rd cent. A.D.). The last two documents contain speeches of the public prosecutor in regard to cases of theft.
1 The more general meaning also is found in BU. 388 ii. .« (Fayyim, Qnd-3rd cent. A.D.). 1
258 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 85, 86
βιάζομαι.
Without entering into the controversy over Matt. 11 ” and Luke 1615, the author wishes only to establish the following facts. Cremer‘, p. 215, thinks that it may be considered as ‘‘ demonstrable’ that the word in Matthew must be taken as a passive: ‘“‘As a deponent it would give no sense whatever, since βιάζεσθαι cannot stand without an object or a substitute therefor, like πρόσω, εἴσω, and does not so stand’ . . .; 1t represents no independent idea such as do violence, come forward violently. At least this passage would afford, so far as can be seen, the sole example of such a meaning.’ But in opposition to this we may refer to the epigraphic regulations of Xanthus the Lycian for the sanctuary of Men Tyrannos founded by him, C/A. in. 74,? cf. 73 (found near Sunium, not earlier than the imperial period), where βιάζομαι is without doubt reflexive and abso- lute. After the ceremonial purifications are stated, the per- formance of which is the condition of entrance into the temple, it is further said that no one may sacrifice in the temple ἄνε[υ] τοῦ καθειδρυσαμένου *’ τὸ ἱερόν (meaning most likely, without permission from the founder of the temple); ἐὰν δέ τις βιάσηται, the regulation continues, ἀπρόσδεκτος ἢ ἡ θυσία “παρὰ τοῦ θεοῦ, but if any one comes forward violently, or enters by force, his offering is not pleasing to the god. But for such as, on the contrary, have rightly performed all that is pre- scribed, the founder wishes, further on, καὶ εὐείλατος 4 yévou[t]o ὁ θεὸς τοῖς θεραπεύουσιν ἁπλῇ τῇ ψυχῆ. This anti- thesis is decisive for the sense of βιάσηται.
διετία.
Authenticated only in Philo; Thayer (p. 148) adds to this the Graecus Venetus of Gen. 41}, 45°. The word (Acts 2477 28%) occurs also in BU. 1807 (Fayyim, 172 a.p.) and Perg. 525 13 (after 217 A.D.).
1 Italics from Cremer.
2 — Dittenberger, Sylloge, No. 379. See, in reference to καθαρίζω, p. 216.
5" Of. its antithesis, εὐπρόσδεκτος, also said of a sacrifice, Rom. 15° and
1 Pet. 25, like θυσία δεκτή Phil. 4 15 and LXX. 4 An additional reference for this word; cf. p. 122.
N. 86, 87] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 259
δοκίμιος.
A word belonging to the Greek Bible which the Papyni are bringing again to life, after the exegetes had well-nigh strangled it. With reference to the passages James 1? τὸ δοκίμιον ὑμῶν τῆς πίστεως κατεργάζεται ὑπομονήν, and 1 Pet. 11 ἵνα τὸ δοκίμιον ὑμῶν τῆς πίστεως πολυτιμότερον χρυσίου τοῦ ἀπολλυμένου διὰ πυρὸς δὲ δοκιμαζομένου εὑρεθῇ εἰς ἔπαινον καὶ δόξαν καὶ τιμὴν ἐν ἀποκαλύψει ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ, it is com- monly stated that τὸ δοκίμιον is equal to τὸ δοκιμεῖον, means of testing. This hypothesis is linguistically possible; the author certainly knows no reason why, in such case, the word is always accented δοκίμιον and not δοκιμῖον. But on material grounds there are grave objections to the hypothesis. Even the thorough-going defence of it in connection with the Petrine passage by KE. Kihl! still leaves the present writer with the feeling that, so taken, the Apostle’s thought is unnatural and indistinct, not to say unintelligible. And this also gives us the reason why most exegetes search for another meaning of the word, one which will in some degree suit the context; thus, e.g., Clavis®, p. 106, decides for exploratio in James 1°, and for verification in 1 Pet. 1’, two meanings which the word never has anywhere else, and all but certainly cannot have. But the whole difficulty of the case was primarily brought about by the exegetes themselves, nearly all of whom misunderstood the word. Only Schott and Hofmann have fallen on the right view in their surmise (see Kuhl, p. 88) that δοκίμιον is the neuter of an adjective. On this Kuhl observes, with a reference to Winer’, p. 220, that this interpretation is rendered void by the fact that δοκίμιον is not an adjective, but a genuine substantive, while Winer says ‘there is no adjective doxiwsos”. True, there is no doxipwros —that is, in the lexica; nor would Schott and Hofmann be able to find it. This want, however, is supplied by the Fayyim Papyrus documents of the Archduke
1 Meyer, xii.® (1897), p. 87 fi.
2 Tholuck also, in Beitrdge zur Spracherklérung des Neuen Testaments, Halle, 1832, p. 45, makes this conjecture, with a reference to Wahl; but he has no example at his disposal.
260 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 87, 88
Rainer’s collection. In the pawn-ticket PER. xii.6+ (93 AD.) there are mentioned gold buckles of the weight of 74 minae of good gold (χρυσοῦ δοκιμίου); the marriage contract xxiv. 5 (136 A.D.) enumerates ornaments in the bride’s dowry to the value of 13 quarters of good gold (χρυσοῦ δοκιμείου “) ; a frag- ment of the same contract, xxvi., reads in linee [χρυσ]ίου [δοκ])υμίου, and in lines [χρ]υ[ σ]οῦ [δΊοκι μ]είου “ὁ ; similarly the fragments of marriage contracts xxill.4 (reign of Antoninus Pius) [χρυσίου] δοκειμείου *’, xxil.s5 (reign of Antoninus Pius) [χρυ]σίου do[xiuiov], and xxi. 12 (230 A.D.) [χρυσοῦ] doxipiov. There can be no doubt about the meaning of this δοκίμιος, and, in addition, we have the advantage of possessing a Papyrus which gives information on the matter. The marriage contract, PER. xxiv., is also preserved in a copy, and this copy, PER. xxv., lines, reads χρυσίου δοκίμου instead of the χρυσοῦ δοκιμείου of the original. Now this δοκίμου can hardly be a clerical error, but rather an easy variant, as immaterial for the sense as χρυσίου for χρυσοῦ : δοκίμιος has the meaning of δόκιμος proved, acknowledged, which was used, precisely of metals, in the sense of valid, standard, genuine (e.g., LXX Gen. 231° ἀργυρίου δοκίμου, similarly 1 Chron. 29*, 2 Chron. 9" χρυσίῳ δοκίμῳ ; par- ticulars in Cremer ®, p. 335 1).
Hence, then, the adjective δοκίμιος, proved, genuine, must be recognised, and may be adopted without misgiving in both the New Testament passages.! τὸ δοκίμιον ὑμῶν τῆς πίστεως is the exceedingly common classical construction of the sub- stantival neuter of an adjective with genitive (often of an abstract noun) following, which we find in the New Testa- ment, especially in Paul.? An almost identical example is
1 Τὺ is very highly probable that the Greek writer Oecumenius still understood it as an adjective in these passages; he interprets δοκίμιον τὸ κεκριμένον λέγει, τὸ δεδοκιμασμένον, τὸ καθαρόν (Tischendorf in reference to James 13). The substitution, in some minuscules, of δόκιμος for δοκίμιος, in both the New Testament passages (as in the Papyrus document PHR. xxv. 4), likewise supports the view that late Greek copyists understood the word. The forma- tion of the word is plain: δοκίμιος comes from δόκιμος, as ἐλευθέριος from ἐλεύθερος, and καθάριος from καθαρός.
2 Cf. most recently Blass, Gramm., p. 151f. [Eng. Trans., p. 155.]
N. 88, 89] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 261
2 Cor. 8° τὸ τῆς ὑμετέρας ἀγάπης γνήσιον We would render whatever is genuine in your faith in both passages. Luther’s translation of the passage in James, viz., ewer Glaube, so er rechtschafjen ist (your faith, so it be upright), must be pro- nounced altogether correct. And thus, too, all ambiguity disappears from the passage in Peter: so that what is genwine in your faith may be found more precious than gold—which, in spite of its perishableness, is yet proved genuine by fire—unto praise and glory and honour at the revelation of Jesus Christ. We would here avoid entering more particularly into the exegetical controversy: the proposed explanation must be its own justification.
But the tale of the ill-treatment of this word is not even yet fully told. The exegetes have disowned it also in the LXX ; it was suppressed by dint of taking two instances of the traditional δοκύμίον as identical. According to Clavis 3, p. 106, δοκίμιον = δοκιμεῖον LXX Prov. 277 and Ps. 11 {Hebr. 12]? with the meaning of crucible ; according to Kiihl, it signifies here as always means of testing. Now it is certain that, in Prov. 27" δοκίμιον ἀργυρίῳ καὶ χρυσῷ πύρωσις, we must take δοκιμῖον (or δοκίμιον ?) as ἃ substantive; it does not, indeed, mean crucible, though that is the meaning of the original—just as little as πύρωσις means furnace, the original notwithstanding. The fact is rather that in the translation the sense of the original has been changed. As it stands the sentence can only be understood thus : fire is the test for silver and gold; only so does one catch the point of the apodosis. The case is quite different with Ps. 11 [12]* τὰ λόγια κυρίου λόγια ἁγνὰ ἀργύριον πεπυρωμένον δοκιμίον TH γῇ κεκαθαρι- σμένον ἑπταπλασίως. ΤῊΘ 58η58 of the original of δοκέμιίον τῇ γῇ is a matter of much controversy. To δοκίμιον corresponds
bby (crucible 5 workshop ?) of which the etymology is ob- scure, and τῇ γῆ 15 a rendering of vIn, the grammatical relations of which are likewise uncertain. The solution of
these difficulties is of no further consequence to our ques- tion ; in any case the sense has been again altered by the
1 See p. 250, sub τὸ γνήσιον.
262 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 89, 90
translators, for the Greek word can mean neither crucible nor workshop. We must therefore deal with the Greek sentence as we best can. If, with Kuhl, we take δοκέμιον as a sub- stantive equivalent to means of testing (which δοκιμῖον [or δοκίμιον 2] can quite well mean), then the sentence runs: The words of the Lord are pure words, silver purified by fire, a seven times refined means-of-testing for the earth (or for the land ?). Such would, indeed, be the most obvious render- ing,) but what is gained thereby? We get a tolerable meaning only by taking δοκίμιον adjectivally: the words of the Lord are pure words, genuine silver, purified by fire, seven times refined, for the land. Godly men cease, untruth and deceit are found on every side, a generation speaking great things has arisen: but Jahweh promises succour to the wretched, and, amidst the prevailing unfaithfulness, His words are the pure, tried defence of the land. Taken some- what in this way, the sentence fits into the course of thought in the Greek psalm.
Finally, the texts of the LXX yield still further testi- mony to the existence of this adjective. In 1 Chron. 294, Β΄“ gives the reading ἀργυρίου δοκιμίου instead of ἀργυρίου δοκίμους The same confusion of δόκεμος and δοκίμιος, which we have already seen in the Papyri and the New Testament MSS., is shown in Zech. 11°: instead of δόκιμον, py “ “ἢ Q* (Marchalianus, 6th cent. A.D., Egypt) have δοκίμιον, Q* δοκίμειον.
ἐκτένεια, ἐκτενῶς.
The ethical sense endurance (2 Macc. 14 33, 3 Macc. 6, Judith 4°, Cic. ad Attic. 10, 17, 1, Acts 267) is also found in IMAe. 1082 10 (Carpathus, 2nd cent. B.C.) τὰν πᾶσαν ἐκτένειαν καὶ κακοπαθίαν παρεχόμενος. In linez of the same Inscrip- tion ἐκτενῶς is used in a corresponding sense.
| τῇ γῇ could also be connected with the verb as an instrumental dative: but that would make the sentence more enigmatic than ever. We do not understand the suggestion of Cremer‘, p. 340, at the end of the article δοκίμιον.
N. 90, 91] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 263
ἔσθησις.
But few references for this word are given in connection with Acts 1, Luke 24% A, etc.; cf. BU. 16 Rw (Fayyim, 159-160 A.D.) χρω[μ]ένου ἐρεαῖς ἐσθήσεσι."
/ , κακοπάθεια OY κακοπαθία.
For this word in James 5°, usually written κακοπάθεια, Clavis*, p. 222, gives only the meaning vexatio, calamitas, aerumna, and Beyschlag? expressly rejects the meaning vexa- tionwm patientia. Cremer’, p. 749, likewise enters the passage under affliction, pains, misfortune, but this must be an error, aS he again records it three lines below under the other meaning, bearing of affliction. The context sup- ports this interpretation (though we cannot think it impossible that James might have said: Take an example from the prophets in affliction and patience). From the re- ferences given in Clavis we might judge that this sense of the word could not be authenticated. But the passages quoted by Cremer, 4 Macc. 9* and Plut. Nwm. 3, 5, may be supplemented by references from the Inscriptions. In [M4e. 103210 (Carpathus, 2nd cent. B.C.) τὰν πᾶσαν ἐκτένειαν καὶ κακοπαθίαν παρεχόμενος, this meaning may be inferred from the co-ordination of the word with ἐκτένεια ; similarly Perg. 252 16+. (early Roman period, therefore after 133 B.c.) τῶν τε ἐκκομι[ δῶν] ἐπιμελείᾳ καὶ κακοπαθίᾳ διει[πὼν τὰ δέοντα πᾶ]σαν ἐπιστροφὴν ἐποήσατ[ο] . Frankel, indeed (p. 184), translates the word here by pains, but the context permits us to infer that not pains, in the passive sense of suffering, is intended here, but the active taking pains. In support of this ‘‘ weakening of the concept,” Frankel further quotes the Inscription in honour of the gymnasiarch Menas of Sestos (Dittenberger, Sylloge 247), liness and 23. W. Jerusa- lem* observes, in connection with this passage from the
1 Corrected reading in the Supplement, p. 395.
2 Meyer, xv.* (1888), p. 222.
* Wiener Studien, i. (1879), p. 47.—Cf. also A. Wilhelm, GGA., 1898, p. 227: “The κακοπαθία, with which the travelling of embassies, particularly over sea, is usually associated, is prominently mentioned in numberless psephismata ”.
264 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 91, 92
Inscription of Sestos (ca. 120 B.c.), that ‘‘of course”’ the word at first meant suffering of misfortune, but that, in the Inscription, it has the more general meaning of ewertion, endurance, Which meaning, he says, is also met with in con- temporary Inscriptions, and is much more frequent in Polybius than the common one.
The objection may be made that these are in reality two different words with different meanings. But even granting that κακοπαθία is of different formation from κακοπάθεια, there still remains the question whether the traditional κακοπαθείας may not be an itacistic variation of κακοπαθίας. The present writer would, with Westcott and Hort, decide for this alternative, and read κακοπαθίας (so
B* and P). κατάκριμα.
This rare word is authenticated (apart from Rom. 51°38, 8.1) only in Dion. Hal. 6, 61. All the less should the follow- ing passages be disregarded. In the deed of sale, PER. 1. (Fayyam, 83-84 a.pD.), lines, it is said of a piece of land that it is transferred to the purchaser καθαρὰ ἀπὸ παντὸς ὀφειλήματος ἀπὸ μὲν δημοσίων τελεσμάτων (16) πάντων καὶ [ἑτέρων εἰ]δῶν καὶ ἀρταβίων 2 καὶ ναυβίων καὶ ἀριθμητικῶν καὶ ἐπιβολῆς κώμης καὶ κατακριμάτων πάντων καὶ παντὸς εἴδους, similarly [1η681:. καθαρὰ ἀπὸ] δημοσίων τελεσμάτων καὶ ἐπι[γρ]αφῶν πασῶν καὶ ἀρταβίων καὶ ναυβίων καὶ ἀριθμητικοῦ (52) [καὶ ἐπιβ]ολῆς κ[ώμης καὶ κατακριμάτ]ων πάντων καὶ παντὸς εἴδους. Corresponding to this we have, in the deed of sale PER. clxxxvill. ut. (Fayytim, 105-106 a.p.), καθαρὰ ἀπὸ μὲν δημοσίων τελεσμάτων πάντων Kal ἐπυγραφῶν πασῶν (15) ee | ἐπιβολῆς κώ μ]ης καὶ [κατα]κ[ριμάτων πάντων καὶ πίαντ]ὸς εἴδους. Τῦ 15 obvious that in these passages κατακρί- ματα is used technically : some kind of burdens upon a piece of land must be meant. Wessely translates the first passage thus: free of all debts, free of all arrears of public assessments of all kinds, of artabae-taxes, naubia-taxes, and taxes for the taking
1 Further particulars in Winer-Schmiedel, § 5, 18 ὁ (p. 44f.). 2 Also in BU. 2331 to be thus read, not apraBiwt [. . .].
N. 92, 93] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 265
of evidence (? Evidenzhaltungssteuern), of the additional pay- ments of the village-communities—in short, of all payments of every kind ; in lines: of the same Papyrus he again renders [κατακριμάτ]ων by taxes. We doubt the accuracy of these renderings, though ourselves unable to interpret the word with certainty. We, nevertheless, conjecture that it signifies a burden ensuing from a judicial pronouncement —a servitude. One may perhaps render legal burden. We are of opinion that the meaning poena condemnationem sequens, which was accepted by earlier lexicographers, but which is now no longer taken into consideration by Clavis® and Cremer’—a meaning in accordance with the above- mentioned usage—is particularly suitable in Rom. δ᾽; ¢f. Hesychius: κατάκριμα: κατάκρισις, καταδίκη.
μαρτυροῦμαι.
This word, especially the participle, is common in the Acts of the Apostles and other early Christian writings, as a designation of honour, viz., to be well reported of ; similarly in IMAe. 83215 (Rhodes, pre-Christian?) μαρτυρηθέντα Kai στε- φανωθέντα, said of a priest of Athena; 214 (Rhodes, 51 A.D.) καὶ μαρτυρηθέντων τῶν ἀνδρῶν, without doubt in the same sense. We find this attribute of honour also in Palmyra: in Waddington, 2606 a (second half of 3rd cent. A.D.), 1t 1s said of a caravan-conductor μαρτυρηθέντα ὑπὸ τῶν ἀρχεμπόρων.ἷ Here we have the construction with ὑπό as in Acts 10”, 16”, 22". So in an Inscription from Naples, [GrSI. 758 το τ. (second half of 1st cent. A.D.), μεμαρτυρημένον ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν διά τε THY τῶν τρόπων κοσμιότητα.
\ / μετὰ καί.
With the late pleonastic καί after μετά in Phil 45 Blass? rightly compares σὺν καί in Clem. 1 Cor. 65°. In the Papyri we have found μετὰ καί only in BU. 4126: (4th
1 Quotation from Mommsen, Rimische Geschichte, v.*, Berlin, 1894, p. 429.
2 See p. 64, note 2. 3 Gr. des Neutest. Griechisch, p. 257. (Hng. Trans., p. 263.]
266 BIBLE STUDIES. [N. 93, 94
cent. A.D.); σὺν καί is more frequent, eg., in the Fayyim Papyri BU. 17919 (reign of Antoninus Pius),’ 51517 (193 A.D.), 362 vi.10 (215 a.D.).
ὀψώνιον."
Neither Clavis* nor Thayer gives any authority earlier than Polybius (t 122 8.6.) for the meaning pay; it is only when, guided by their reference, we consult Sturz, De Dial. Mac., p. 187, that we find that, according to Phrynichus, the comedian Menander (t 290 B.c.) had already used the word in this sense. Soon afterwards, in the agreement (pre- served in an Inscription) of King Eumenes I. with his mercenaries, we find it used several times, Perg. 137. 18. 14 (soon after 263 B.c.)—always in the singular. Note in linez the combination ὀψώνιον λαμβάνειν as in 2 Cor. 11%. The singular is used in the Papyri for army pay, BU. 69s (Fayytm, 120 a.p.); for wages of the ὑδροφύλακες in 621 12 (Fayytim, 2nd cent. A.D.) ; for wages of the watchmen of the vineyards in 14 v.20 (Fayytm, 255 a.p.); the plural of the wages of another workman 14 v.7; the word is similarly used in the passage 111.27, but it is abbreviated, so that one does not know whether it is singular or plural.
πάρεσις.
Cremer‘, p. 467, in reference to the meaning remission (important in respect of Rom. 3”), observes that the word is so used only in Dion. Hal., Antt. Rom. 7, 37, where it means remission of punishment. It probably occurs in BU. 6242 (Fayytm, reign of Diocletian) in the sense of remission of a debt (cf. line 19 ἱερᾶς μὴ ἀμέλει ὀφιλῆ[ς] *°); but it can only be a temporary remission that is here spoken of. The diction being concise and full of technical terms, the meaning is not quite clear to us.
πατροπαράδοτος.
The few hitherto-known authorities for the word (in 1 Pet. 11°) are to be expanded by Perg. 248 49 (135-134 B.c.):
1 Improved reading in Supplement, p. 357. 2 Above, p. 148.

Ν. 94, 95] LANGUAGE OF THE GREEK BIBLE. 267
Attalus writes in a letter to the council and people of Per- gamus that his mother Stratonike has brought tov Mia τὸν Σαβάζιον πατροπαράδοτον | to Pergamus.
σμαράγδινος. Apart from Rev. 4 3, Clavis® gives no references at all. Thayer adds Lucian. In PER. xxvii.s (Fayytim, 190 A.D.) the word is used to describe a woman’s garment: emerald-green.
τήρησις. As in Acts 45, 518, imprisonment, ward, also in BU. 388 ii. τ (Fayytim, 2nd-3rd cent. A.D.) ἐκέλευσεν Σμάραγδον καὶ Εὔκαιρον εἰς τὴν τήρησιν παραδοθῆναι.
τόπος.
With Acts 1” λαβεῖν τὸν τόπον τῆς διακονίας ταύτης καὶ ἀποστολῆς Wendt? compares Sirach 12”. In the latter passage it is one’s place in life, generally, that is spoken of. A more significant example—referring as it does to a place within a definitely closed circle—is the technical use of the word in a dedication of the Pergamenian association, con- sisting of thirty-five or thirty-three members, of the ὑμνῳδοὶ θεοῦ Σεβαστοῦ καὶ θεᾶς Ῥώμης: Perg. 374 Bas. (reign of Hadrian) τοῖς δὲ ἀν[α]παυομένοις εἰς λίβανον προχρήσει ὁ ἄρχων (δηνάρια) ιε΄, ἃ ἀπολήψεται παρὰ τοῦ εἰς τὸν τόπον αὐτοῦ εἰσιόντος" Frankel, p. 266, translates: ‘‘ The officer (the Eukosmos) shall advance, for incense for those deceased, 15 denarii, which he shall withhold from the one who enters the association in place of the departed ”’.
With τόπος as sitting-place Luke 141, cf. Perg. 618 (date ?), where τόπος probably means seat in a theatre ; Fréankel, p. 383, names the following as indubitable instances of this usage: CIG. 2421 = Lebas, 1. 2154 (Naxos); Lebas, 1724 e (Myrina), with a reference to Bohn-Schuchhardt, Altertiimer von Aegae, p. 54, No. 7.
1 Stratonike came originally from Cappadocia.
2 Meyer, iii. 6/7 (1888), p. 52.
5 Frankel, p. 267, remarks on this that εἰσιέναι cis τὸν τόπον 15. used like εἰσιέναι eis ἀρχήν (e.g. Speech against Neaira, 72, Plutarch’s Praec. Ger. Reip. 813 Ὁ). ᾿Αρχή is similarly used in Jude®; cf. LXX Gen. 40”.


ΤΥ
ΑΝ EPIGRAPHIC MEMORIAL OF THE SEPTUAGINT.
4.» εἰ ἄραγε ψηλαφήσειαν αὐτὸν καὶ εὕροιεν.


ΑΝ EPIGRAPHIC MEMORIAL OF THE SEPTUAGINT.
The Alexandrian translation of the Old Testament passed from the sphere of Jewish learning after Hellenistic Judaism had ceased to exist. Later on, the very existence of a Greek translation was completely forgotten.' It is therefore all the more interesting to follow the traces which reveal any direct or indirect effects which the Septuagint had upon the common people—their thoughts and their illusions.
The materials for a knowledge of the popular religious and ethical ideas of the Jews and Christians in the imperial period are more meagre than those which yield us the thoughts of the cultured and learned. But those materials, scanty though they be, have not as yet been fully worked. Scholars are usually more interested in the theologians of Tiberias, Alexandria, Antioch and Rome, than in such people as found their edification in the ‘‘ Apocryphal”’ Legends, Gospels and Acts. But surely it is erroneous to suppose that we have a satisfactory knowledge of the history of religion when we have gained but a notion of the origin and development of dogma. The history of religion is the history of the religious feeling (Religiositdt) not that of theology, and as truly as religion is older than theology,— as truly as religion has existed in every age outside of theology and in opposition to dogma, so imperious must grow the demand that we shall assign a place in the gallery of history to the monuments of popular piety. These are
1Cf. L. Dukes, Literaturhistorische Mittherlungen tiber die dltesten hebrdischen Hxegeten, Grammatiker u. Lexikographen (Ewald & Dukes, Beitrdge, ii.), Stuttgart, 1844, p. 53; Schiirer, ii., p. 700 ff. [Hng. Trans, ii., iii., p. 168 f.]; J. Hamburger, Real-Hncyclopddie fiir Bibel und Talmud, ii., Leipzig, 1883, p. 1234.
272 BIBLE STUDIES. [24
necessarily few. For while theology, and the religion of theologians, have always been capable of asserting them- selves, the religion of the people at large has not been concerned to raise memorials of itself. Thus it is not to be wondered at that the copious literature of theology should, so far as appearance goes, stifle the insignificant remains of the people’s spontaneous expression of their religion }—not to speak of the fact that much that was of value in the latter was intentionally destroyed. That which was extra-theo- logical and extra-ecclesiastical was looked upon by the official theology as ὦ priori questionable. Why, even at the present day, most of those productions of ancient popular religion come to us bearing the same stigma: we are accustomed to think of them as Apocryphal, Heretical, Gnostic, and as such to ignore them.
But those ideas, further, which we commonly designate as Superstition? seem to the author to deserve a place in the history of popular religion. The ordinary members of the community, townsman and peasant, soldier and slave, went on living a religious life of their own,’ unaffected by the theological tendencies around them. We may very well doubt, indeed, whether that which moved their hearts was religion in the same sense as Prophecy or the Gospel, but their faith had received from the illustrious past the religious temper, at least, of ingenuous and unquestioning childhood. Their faith was not the faith of Isaiah or of the Son of Man; still, their ‘‘ superstition ’’ was not wholly forsaken of God. A devout soul will not be provoked by their follies, for throughout all their ‘“ heathenish”’ myth-forming and the natural hedonism of their religion there throbbed a yearning anticipation of the Divine.
The superstitions of the imperial period do not permit
1 A similar relation subsists in kind between the materials of literary speech and of popular speech.
2J. Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie, ii.2, Gottingen, 1854, p. 1060, says ‘Superstition formed in some ways a religion for the homes of the lower classes throughout”.
3 Of. F. Piper, Mythologie der christlichen Kunst, Erste Abth., Weimar, 1847, p. ix. f.
25] A SEPTUAGINT MEMORIAL. 273
of being divided into the three classes: Heathen, Jewish, Christian. There is frequently no such clear distinction between the faith of the Heathen and the Jew and that of the Christian. Superstition is syncretic in character: this fact has been anew confirmed by the extensive recently- discovered remains of the Literature of Magic. And yet it is possible, with more or less precision, to assign certain fragments of these to one of the three departments named.
The literary memorial which is to be discussed below has been influenced in the most marked degree by the ideas of Greek Judaism, or, what is practically the same, of the Alexandrian Old Testament. After a few remarks about the circumstances of its discovery,' the text itself 15 given.
The tablet of lead upon which the Inscription 1s scratched comes from the large Necropolis of ancient Adrumetum, the capital of the region of Byzacium in the Roman province of Africa. The town lies on the coast to the south-east of Carthage. In connection with the French excavations which have been successfully carried on there for some time, the rolled-up tablet was incidentally found by a workman in the
1 The author here follows the information which G. Maspero, the first editor of the Inscription, gave in the Collections du Musée Alaow, premiére série, 8° livraison, Paris, 1890, p. 100 ff. A phototypic fac-simile of the tablet forms the frontispiece of BIBELSTUDIEN. Only after the original issue of the present work did the author learn of the sketch by Josef Zingerle in Philologus, liii. (1894), p. 344, which reproduces the text from Revue archéologique, wi t. xxi. (1893), p. 397 ff. (Reprint from Collections du Musée Alaowt, i., Ὁ. 100 fi.) The text has been discussed also by A. Hilgenfeld, Berl. Philol. Wochenschrift, xvi. (1896), p. 647 ff.; R. Wiinsch, CIA. Appendix (1897), xvii. f.; and L. Blau, Das altjiidische Zauberwesen (1898), p. 96 fi. The tablet has been noticed (with obser- vations by A. Dieterich) by F. Hiller von Gaertringen in the Sztzwngsberichte der Berliner Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1898, p.586. Cf. also Schiirer, *iii., p. 298 f. Individual textual conjectures and exegetic proposals are found in the various critiques of the BipetstupimN. The author hopes subsequently to take special advantage of the new exegetic material afiorded by Hilgenfeld and Blau in particular. In the following he has corrected his former reading Aouitiavay (line ὅ) to Δομιτιανὴν, and (line ,;) ἵνα αὐτὴν to ἵν᾽ αὐτὴν. Hilgen- feld’s assertion (p. 648) that Δομιτιανὴν should be read throughout is erroneous.
18
274 BIBLE STUDIES. [26, 28
June of 1890 ; ' he noticed it only when a prong of his mattock had pierced the roll. This damaged the tablet in three places.” There were also other three holes in the lead—probably caused by a nail with which the roll had been perforated. The tablet is thus damaged in six places, but the few letters which are in each case destroyed permit, with one exception, of being easily supplied.
We read the text thus? :—
Ορκίζω σε, δαιμόνιον πνεῦμα TO ἐνθάδε κείμενον, τῷ OVO- ματι τῷ ἁγίῳ Awd
Αβ[αω)θ τὸν θεὸν τοῦ ABpaav καὶ τὸν Iaw τὸν τοῦ Ιακου, Iaw
Line 2, Ιακου: M. corr. ᾿Ι(σ)άκου.
1 Τὴ 1889 a tabula devotionis had been discovered in the Necropolis of Adrumetum, and it was discussed by M. Bréal and G. Maspero in the fifth instalment of the Collections (1890) just cited; it, too, contains a love-spell, but is, apart from a few Divine names, free from biblical ideas and phrases. A third tablet of Adrumetum, the publication of which was prospectively announced on the cover of the eighth instalment, has not yet been issued. Professor Maspero of Paris, Member of the Institute of France, had the great kindness to inform the author (16th April, 1894) that the contents of this tablet and similar unpublished pieces were likewise non-Jewish. In CIL. viii., Swppl. i. (1891), swb Nos. 12504-12511, there have recently been brought together some tabule execrationwm discovered in Carthage, of which the last affords some parallels to our tablet: see below.—Cf. now the copious material collected by R. Wiinsch in the CIA. Appendix continens de- fixionum tabellas in Attica regione repertas, Berlin, 1897; also M. Siebourg, Hin gnostisches Goldamulet aus Gellep, in Bonner Jahrbiicher, Heft 103 (1898), p. 195 fi.
2 We imagine that these are the three holes upon the right margin of the tablet.
3 We have indicated the divergent readings of Maspero by M. The numerous errors in accentuation which his text contains are not noted here. Restorations are bracketed [], additions (). We have left umaccented the Divine names and the other transcriptions, not knowing how these were accented by the writer of the tablet and the author of his original text. To furnish them with the “traditional” accents given in the editions of the Greek Bible, so far as the names in question occur there, serves no purpose, to say nothing of the fact that these “‘ traditional ” accents themselves cannot be scientifically authenticated. Cf. Winer-Schmiedel, ὃ 6, 8 ὁ (p. 75f.). [Hng. Trans., p. 59.]


συ
10
1ὅ
20
A SEPTUAGINT MEMORIAL. 915
Ao[@ Αβ]αωθ θεὸν τοῦ Ισραμα" ἄκουσον Tod ὀνόματος ἐντίμου καὶ [φοβ]εροῦ καὶ μεγάλου καὶ ἄπελθε πρὸς τὸν O(v)p- βανὸν, ὃν ἔτεκ(ε)ν Οὐρβανὰ, καὶ ἄξον αὐτὸν πρὸς τὴν Δομιτιανὴν, ἣν ἔτεκεν Καν]δίδα, ἐρῶντα μαινόμενον ἀγρυπνο[ ὺν]- τα ἐπὶ τῇ φιλίᾳ αὐτῆς καὶ ἐπιθυμίᾳ καὶ δεόμενον αὐτῆς ἐπανελθεῖν εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν αὐτοῦ σύμβιο[ν] γενέσθαι. “Ορκίζω σε τὸν μέγαν θεὸν τὸν αἰώνιον καὶ ἐπαιώνιον καὶ παντοκράτορα τὸν ὕὑπερ- avo τῶν - / lal ς / AN / \ > \ ὑπεράνω θεῶν. “Opxifw [σε] τὸν κτίσαντα Tov οὐρανὸν καὶ τὴν θά- λασσαν. “Opxifw σε τὸν διαχωρίσαντα τοὺς εὐσεβεῖς. “Ορκίζω σε \ / \ Gee: 5 a , 4 a \ τὸν διαστήσαντα τὴν ῥάβδον ἐν τῇ θαλάσσῃ, ἀγαγεῖν καὶ ζεῦξαι [τὸ]ν Οὐρβανὸν, ὃν ἔτεκεν Οὐρβανὰ, πρὸς τὴν Aopitiavar, ἣν ἔτεκεν [Καν]δίδα, ἐρῶντα ϑασανιζόμενον ἀγρυπνοῦντα ἐπὶ τῇ ἐπιθυμίᾳ αὐ- lol \ 4 vA > \ A > δ > \ 3 / τῆς καὶ ἔρωτι, Wa αὐτὴν σύμβιον ἀπάγῃ εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν ἑαυτοῦ. ‘Opki- \ ΄ \ ε iA SN ta) iG , ζω σε τὸν ποιήσαντα THY ἡμίονον μὴ τεκεῖν. Ορκίζω σε τὸν διορίσαν- Ἂ rn ᾽ fal ta τὸ ἰ φῶς] ἀπὸ τοῦ σκότους. “Ορκίζω σε τὸν συντρίβοντα τὰς πέτρας. « / \ Ορκίξζ[ω σ]ε τὸν ἀπο(ρ)ρήξαντα τὰ ὄρη. ‘OpKitw σε τὸν συνστρέφοντα τὴν fo) lal ie a γῆν eli τ]ῶν θεμελίων αὐτῆς. “Ορκίξω σε τὸ ἅγιον ὄνομα ὃ οὐ λέγεται" ἐν τῷ [...]o [ὀ]νομά ὑτὸ καὶ οἱ δαί θῶ ὦ (ered μάσω αὑτὸ καὶ οἱ δαίμονες ἐξεγερθῶσιν ἔκθαμβοι καὶ περί- / a » φοβί οι γεν]όμενοι, ἀγαγεῖν καὶ ζεῦξαι σύμβιον τὸν Οὐρ- βανὸν, ὃν ἔτεκεν Line 3 and line 39, Ισραμα: Μ. corr. ᾿Ισραήλ.
Line 4, line 5 had to be commenced after μεγάλου. Line 20, τῷϊ.. .]ῳ: M. τῷ (ἀδύτ)ῳ.
276
25
30
30
BIBLE STUDIES. [29, 30
’ \ Ἃ \ = Οὐρβανὰ, πρὸς τὴν Δομιτιανὰν, ἣν ἔτεκεν Κανδίδα, ἐρῶντα καὶ δεόμε- > a ” / c / rn νον αὐτῆς, ἤδη ταχύ. “Ορκίζω σε τὸν φωστῆρα καὶ ἄστρα ἐν οὐρανῷ ποιή- σαντα διὰ φωνῆς προστάγ[μ]ατος ὥστε φαίνειν πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις. Ὅ / \ If lal \ ’ / ρκίζω σε Tov συνσείσαν tla πᾶσαν τὴν οἰκουμένην και τὰ ὄρη > / “ ἐκτραχηλίζοντα καὶ ἐκβρά ἕ]οντα τὸν ποιοῦντα ἔκτρομον \ lal τὴν [oH “ \ 7] ΄ \ lal ς ν ἅπασίαν καὶ) καινίζοντα πάντας τοὺς κατοικοῦντας. ὋὋρ- / / κίζω σε TOV ποιή- σαντα σημεῖα ἐν ovpav@ κ[αὶ] ἐπὶ γῆς καὶ θαλάσσης, ἀγαγεῖν καὶ ζεῦξαι 7 \ , σύμβιον τὸν Οὐρβανὸν, ὃν ἔτεκεν Οὐρβανὰ, πρὸς τὴν Δομιτιανὰν, ἣν ΝΜ / Di a > fo] \ > “ SPAN an ἔτεκεν Κανδίδα, ἐρῶντα αὐτῆς καὶ ἀγρυπνοῦντα ἐπὶ TH ἐπιθυμίᾳ αὐ- lel / ᾽ fol \ 5; - > \ v4 3. i τῆς δεόμενον αὐτῆς καὶ ἐρωτῶντα αὐτὴν, ἵνα ἐπανέλθῃ εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν ’ lal / / ¢ A \ \ Ν ΄ [αἸὐτοῦ σύμβιος γενομένη. ᾿Ορκίζω σε τὸν θεὸν τὸν μέγαν τὸν αἰώ- \ 4 ἃ a ” \ ΄ > [velov καὶ παντοκράτορα, ὃν φοβεῖται ὄρη καὶ νάπαι καθ ὅλην [τ]ὴν οἰ-
«κο[ υἹμέζν]ην, δι’ ὃν ὁ λέων ἀφίησιν τὸ ἅρπαγμα καὶ τὰ
ὄρη τρέμει καὶ ἡ γῆ] καὶ ἡ θάλασσα, ἕκαστος ἰδάλλεται ὃν ἔχει φόβος τοῦ Κυρίου ᾽ / ’ / 4 / 2 α[ἰωνίου] ἀθανάτου παντεφόπτου μισοπονήρου ἐπιστα- μένου τὰ / 5 Ν Ν \ \ A / es! [γενόμεν]α ἀγαθὰ Kai κακὰ Kai κατὰ θάλασσαν Kai πο- ταμοὺς καὶ τὰ ὄρη κα[ὶ τὴν γ]ῆν, Aw? ABaw τὸν θεὸν τοῦ ABpaav καὶ τὸν [I]jaw τὸν τοῦ ἴακου, Ιαᾳ[ὦ] Aw@ Αβαωθ θεὸν τοῦ Ισραμα' ἄξον ζεῦξον τὸν Οὐρβανὸν, ὃν Line 27, και before καινίζοντα had fallen out by hemigraphy. Line 33, dv: M. οὗ.
Line 35, ἕκαστος (in place of the ἕκαστον of the original) ἰδάλλεται : M.
(dv) ἕκαστος (ε)ἰδάλλεται.
80, 81] A SEPTUAGINT MEMORIAL. 277
40
45
Μ » \ \ \ ,
ἔτεκεν Οὐρβα(νὰ), πρὸς τὴν Δομιτιανὰν, ἣν ἔτεκεν Καν- δίδα, ἐρῶντα
μαι[ ν]όμενον βασανιζόμενον ἐπὶ τῇ φιλίᾳ καὶ ἔρωτι καὶ ἐπιθυμία
τῆς Δομιτιανῆς, ἣν ἔτεκεν Κανδίδα, ζεῦξον αὐτοὺς γάμῳ καὶ
ΒΩ la) « a a aA > lal , ld
ἔρωτι συμβιοῦντας ὅλῳ τῷ τῆς ζωῆς αὐτῶν χρόνῳ ποίη- σον av-
τὸν ὡς δοῦλον αὐτῇ ἐρῶντα ὑποτεταχθέναι, μηδεμίαν ἄλλη[ν]
γυναῖκα μήτε παρθένον ἐπιθυμοῦντα, μόνην δὲ τὴν 41ο- μιτια[ζνὰν],
aA 4 tal a a
ἣν ἔτεκεν Kavdida, σύμβ[ιἾον ἔχειν ὅλῳ τ[ῷ] τῆς [ζωῆς αὐτῶν χρόνῳ],
” ” \ vA
ἤδη ἤδη ταχὺ ταχύ.
Line 44, ἄλλη[»ν]: M. μήτε.
Keeping up the formal peculiarities of the text, we may,
perhaps, translate it as follows :—
4&5
10
15
“1 adjure thee, demonic spirit, who dost rest here, with the sacred names Aoth Abaoth, by the God of Abraan and the Jao of Jaku, the Jao Aoth Abaoth, the God of Israma: hearken to the glorious and fearful and great name, and hasten to Urbanus, whom Urbana bore, and bring him to Domitiana, whom Candida bore, so that he, loving, frantic, sleepless with love of her and desire, may beg her to return to his house and become his wife. I adjure thee by the great God, the eternal and more than eternal and almighty, who is exalted above the exalted Gods. I adjure thee by Him who created the heaven and the sea. I adjure thee by him who separates the devout ones. I adjure thee by him who divided his staff in the sea “Ὁ, that thou bring Urbanus, whom Urbana bore, and unite him with Domit- iana, whom Candida bore, so that he, loving, tormented, sleepless with desire of her and with love, may take her home to his house as his wife. I adjure thee by him who caused the mule not to bear. I adjure thee by him who divided the light from the darkness. I adjure
278
20
25
30
35
40
BIBLE STUDIES. [32
thee by him who crusheth the rocks. I adjure thee by him who parted the mountains. I adjure thee by him who holdeth the earth upon her foundations. I adjure thee by the sacred Name which is not uttered; in the [— —] I will mention it and the demons will be startled, terrified and full of horror, that thou bring Urbanus, whom Urbana bore, and unite him as husband with Domitiana, whom Candida bore, and that he loving may beseech her; at once! quick! I adjure thee by him who set a lamp and stars in the heavens by the command of his voice so that they might lighten all men. I adjure thee by him who shook the whole world, and causeth the mountains to fall and rise, who causeth the whole earth to quake, and all her inhabitants to return. I adjure thee by him who made signs in the heaven and upon the earth and upon the sea, that thou bring Urbanus, whom Urbana bore, and unite him as husband with Domitiana, whom Candida bore, so that he, loving her, and sleepless with desire of her, beg her and beseech her to return to his house as his wife. I adjure thee by the great God, the eternal and almighty, whom the mountains fear and the valleys in all the world, through whom the lion parts with the spoil, and the mountains tremble and the earth and the sea, (through whom) every one becomes wise who is possessed with the fear of the Lord, the eternal, the immortal, the all-seeing, who hateth evil, who knoweth what good and what evil happeneth in the sea and the rivers and the mountains and the earth, Aoth Abaoth ; by the God of Abraan and the Jao of Jaku, the Jao Aoth Abaoth, the God of Israma, bring and unite Urbanus, whom Urbana bore, with Domitiana, whom Candida bore,—loving, frantic, tormented with love and affection and desire for Domitiana, whom Candida bore; unite them in marriage and as spouses in love for the whole time of their life. So make it that he, loving, shall obey her like a slave, and desire no other wife or maiden, but have Domitiana alone, whom Candida
33] A SEPTUAGINT MEMORIAL. 279
bore, as his spouse for the whole time of their life, at once, at once! quick, quick!”
EXPLANATION.
The tablet, as is shown not only by its place of origin (the Necropolis of Adrumetum belongs to the second and third centuries, A.D.; the part in which the tablet was found is fixed in the third), but also by the character of the lettering, is to be assigned to the third century,! that is— to determine it by a date in the history of the Greek Bible— about the time of Origen.
Maspero includes it among the Imprecation-tablets (Devotions- oder Defixionstafeln) not infrequently found in ancient tombs.2_ A leaden tablet, rolled up lke a letter, was placed in the tomb with the dead, in order, as it were, to let it reach the residence of the deities of the underworld ; to their vengeance was delivered the enemy whose destruction was desired. This tablet, however, contains no execrations against an enemy, but is a love-spell* dressed in the form of an energetic adjuration of a demon, by means of which a certain Domitiana desires to make sure of the possession of her Urbanus. The technical details of the spell have no direct significance for our subject; we are interested only in the formule by which the demon is adjured. It is upon these, therefore, that the greatest stress will be laid in the following detailed explanation.
We may at once take for granted that these formule were not composed by Domitiana herself. She copied them, or had them copied, from one of the many current books of Magic, and in doing so had her own name and that of the
1 Maspero, p. 101.
2 Cf. upon these A. Dieterich most recently, Fleckeisen’s Jahrbb. Suppl. Xvi., p. 788 ff. ; as regards the literature cf. also CIL. viii., Swppl. i., p. 1288, and specially Wiinsch, CIA. Appendix (1897).
3 Cf. M. Bréal, in the fifth instalment of the already-cited Collections (1890), p. 58.
4On this species of Magic cf. the instructive citations of Εἰ. Kuhnert, Feuerzauber, Rhein. Museum fiir Philologie, N. F., vol. xlix. (1894), p. 37 ff.
280 BIBLE STUDIES. [34
person loved inserted at the respective places. To conclude from the biblical nature of the formule she used, that she must have been a Jewess, or even a Christian,! would be a precarious inference; it seems to the author more probable that she and Urbanus, to judge from their names perhaps slaves or emancipated 2 persons, were “‘ heathens”. Quite ingenuously the love-sick girl applied the spell, which her adviser asserted to be of use in love-troubles—just because it so stood, black on white, in the “ Books”. On this assumption the historical value of the formule is increased, for the formule thus em- ployed in the third century must have been extracted by the writer of the book in question at a certainly much earlier date? from the Alexandrian Old Testament. In the Magic books now in Paris, Leiden and London, which were in the main composed before the third century, we find quite a multitude of similar adjurations compiled from biblical materials, and the task of subjecting these to a critical sur- vey is well worth while.® It would thus, for the reasons indicated, be a mistake, as the author thinks, to add this tablet to the proofs of the presence of Jews westwards of
1 Maspero, p. 107 f. 2 Tod. p. LOT.
3 This is directly supported by the fact that several of the best-known Bible names in the tablet are corrupt; they have been incorrectly copied. Cf. the Explanation.
4 Of. p. 323.
> C. Wessely, On the spread of Jewish-Christian religious ideas among the Egyptians, in The Expositor, third series, vol. iv. (London, 1886), No. xxi. (incorrectly xiii. on the part), pp. 194-204. Further in A. Dieterich, Abraxas, Ὁ. 136 ff.; Blau, p. 112 ff.; Schiirer,? iii, p. 298 ff. A small col- lection of Hellenistic-Jewish invocations of God, which might be made on the basis of the Magic Papyri and Inscriptions, would be, in consideration of the relatively early period of their composition, certainly not without interest as regards the LXX-Text. Reference may also be made here to the biblical passages found in the Inscriptions. The author is unaware whether these have been treated of collectively from the standpoint of textual criticism. They are also instructive for the history of the way in which the Bible has been used. In very few cases will they be found to have been derived from direct biblical readings. Beginnings of the task here indicated have been made by E. Bohl, Theol. Studien u. Kritiken, 1881, p. 692 ff., and B. Nestle, ibid., 1883, p. 153 f. Materials from the Inscriptions have recently been largely added to.
35, 36] A SEPTUAGINT MEMORIAL. 281
Cyrenaica, a collection of which has been made by Schurer! so far as regards the imperial period.
In detail, the following observations must be made :—
Line lf. Itis the δαιμόνιον πνεῦμα of the tomb in which or upon which the spell was laid that is addressed. That the δαιμόνια stay beside the grave is an idea of post- biblical Judaism : these demons of the tomb help men in the practice of Magic.” It is in the Papyri a frequently given direction, to make sure of the assistance of a spirit who resides in the grave of a murdered person or of one who has in any other way perished unfortunately.’ 0 pxifw τῷ ὀνόματι τῷ ἁγίῳ: cf. 1 (3) Esd. 1%, ὁρκισθεὶς τῷ ὀνόματι κυρίου; for τὸ ὄνομα τὸ ἅγιον, exceedingly frequent in “ biblical’ Greek, specially in Lev., Pss. and Ezek., particular references are unnecessary.—A 6: a Divine name in Magic, not infrequent in the Papyri; in the Clavis Melitonis* it is ‘‘ explained” as gloriosus. As in Pap. Lond. xlvi.134,° so also here it stands in connection with 4 βαωθ, likewise a Magical Divine name. --τὸν θεὸν tov ABpaar: opkitew τινά = to adjure by any one, aS in Mark 5’, Acts 1913, The God of Abraham, etc., 18 the solemn biblical designation of God. We thought it well to leave the form Afpaay in the text, as it is sig- nificant for the nationality of the writer of the tablet: a Jew would hardly have written it so. Domitiana—or the obliging magician—did not know the word. The writer of Pap. Lugd.
lii., p. 504 ( = 5111: p. 26). [Eng. Trans., ii., ii., p. 231, note 48.]
? Hamburger, ii., p. 283. We may compare the idea of the Gospels, that demons reside in lonely and desert regions (Matt. 124); the ἄνθρωπος ἐν πνεύματι ἀκαθάρτῳ had his dwelling among the tombs (Mark 5%). In Baruch 4*, devastated cities are already recognised as dwelling-places of demons.
3 Maspero, p. 105. It was believed that the soul of such a person had to hover about the grave so long as he should have lived had not his life come to an untimely end (Maspero, ibid.). With reference to the notion as a whole cf. E. Rohde, Psyche, Seelencult wnd Unsterblichkeitsqlaube der Griechen, Freiburg in Baden and Leipzig, 1894, p. 373 f. (=7ii., p. 410 f.); also Kuhnert, p. 49.
4In J. B. Pitra, Spicilegiwm Solesmense, iii., Paris, 1855, p. 305. 5 Kenyon, p. 69.
282 BIBLE STUDIES. [36, 37
J 384, ix.7! has made a similar corruption where he, in the midst of a long series of Magical Divine names, writes ABpaav, tov Icax, tov ]Ιακκωβι; so also Codex B (Birch) has ABpaav in Luke 3**. The interchanging of mw and ν at the end of Semitic words is to be frequently seen elsewhere ; see below, p. 310 f.—rtov Iaw τὸν τοῦ Iaxkov: on Iaw see below, p. 824; observe the article here. Iaxov was likewise left as 10 was; probably it 15 a corruption of ἡσακου ;* even Josephus Grecises the simple transcription, as with most proper names; Joax or Joaax he gives as "Jaaxos.
Line 3f. tod Jopapa: clearly a corruption of Jopann, arising from a copyist’s error; the A might easily become A, The use of the solemn designation the God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob is exceedingly common in the Magical formule.* These names, according to Origen, had to be left untranslated in the adjurations if the power of the incantation was not to be Ιοβί. --ἄκουσον τοῦ ὀνόματος ἐντίμου καὶ φοβεροῦ καὶ μεγάλου: LXX Deut. 28%, φοβεῖσθαι τὸ ὄνομα τὸ ἔντιμον τὸ θαυμαστὸν τοῦτο (cf. also Ps. 71 [72]", ὄνομα ἔντιμον said of a human name) ; Ps. 110 [111]", φοβερὸν
1A. Dieterich, Fleckeisen’s Jahrbb. Suppl. xvi., p. 810; Leemans, ii., p. 31.
2 The form might also be a corruption of Ιακουβ, Pap. Lond. cxxi. 649 (see below, p. 324), and Pap. Par. Bibl. nat. 224 (Wessely, i., p. 100) ; similarly in a leaden tablet from Carthage published by A. L. Delattre, Bulletin de correspondance hellénique, xii. (1888), p. 300 = CIL. viii., Swppl.i., No. 12511. —But the other assumption is supported by the following Icpaua ( = Ισραηλ = Ιακωβ).
5 Of., for instance, the Gem found in ancient Cyrenaica—Baudissin, Studien, i., p. 193. Further particulars, especially also patristic authorities,
in R. Heim, Incantamenta magica Graeca Latina; Fleckeisen’s Jahrbb. Suppl. xix. (1893), p. 522 fi.
4 Contra Celsum, v. 45 (Lomm., xix., p. 250 f.): καὶ ἐὰν μὲν ὃ καλῶν ἢ ὃ ὁρκῶν ὀνομάζῃ θεὸν ᾿Αβραὰμ καὶ θεὸν ᾿Ισαὰκ καὶ θεὸν ᾿Ιακὼβ τάδε τινὰ ποιήσαι by ἤτοι διὰ τὴν τούτων φύσιν ἢ καὶ δύναμιν αὐτῶν καὶ δαιμόνων νικωμένων καὶ ὑποταττομένων τῷ λέγοντι ταῦτα. ᾿Ἐὰν δὲ λέγῃ - ὁ θεὸς πατρὸς ἐκλεκτοῦ τῆς ἠχοῦς καὶ 6 θεὺς τοῦ γέλωτος καὶ ὃ θεὸς τοῦ πτερνιστοῦ οὕτως οὐδὲν ποιεῖ τὸ ὀνομαζόμενον, ὡς οὐδ᾽ ἄλλο τι τῶν μηδεμίαν δύναμιν ἐχόντων. Cf. ibid., i. 22, and iv. 33, and also ἃ. Anrich, Das antike Mysterienwesen in semem Hiunvfluss auf das Christentum, Gottingen, 1894, p. 96.
37, 38] A SEPTUAGINT MEMORIAL. 283
τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ, similarly Ps. 98 [99]*; τὸ ὄνομα τὸ μέγα of the name of God, Ps. 98 [99]*, Ezek. 36%, cf. Ps. 75 [76]? and Is. 337; the combination μέγας καὶ φοβερός is very frequently applied to God in the LXX: Deut. 10”, ΕΟ πο 162) Neh. )) 4" Ps. 46, [417], 88 [80]*, 95 [96]*, Sirach 43”.
Lines 4-8. The persons named, as has been said, were probably slaves or had been emancipated. An Οὐρβανός is found also in Rom. 16°; he was a Christian of Ephesus,! and is distinguished by Paul with the title of honour ouvepyos.—The consistent annexation of the name of the person’s mother is stereotyped in the Magic formule, and manifests itself up to a late period.” The directions found in the Magic Papyri exhibit this pattern in innumerable ex- amples; the construction is such that the particular person’s name requires only to be inserted instead of the provisional o δεῖνα, ὃν ἔτεκεν ἡ Seiva.—aypuTvéw ἐπί: cf. UXX Prov. 8*, Job 2153. σύμβιος: as to the usage of this word, especi- ally in Egyptian Greek, attention should be paid to the col- lection of W. Brunet de Presle,®? which may be extended by many passages in the Berlin Papyrus documents now in course of publication. The word is common among the Christians later on.
Line 8 f. τὸν μέγαν θεὸν τὸν αἰώνιον: LXX Is. 26 *, ὁ θεὸς ὁ μέγας ὁ αἰώνιος ; of. Is. 40 “5, Sus. ”.—étratovior: LXX Exod. 1538, κύριος βασιλεύων τὸν αἰῶνα καὶ ἐπ᾽ αἰῶνα καὶ ἔτι--παντοκράτορα, very frequent in ΤΧΧ.- -τὸν ὑπεράνω τῶν ὑπεράνω θεῶν: cf. LXX Hzek. 10”, καὶ δόξα θεοῦ ᾿Ισραὴλ ἦν ἐπ᾽ αὐτῶν (the cherubim) ὑπεράνω,
1 Τῇ Rom. 16 is [or belongs to] a letter to Ephesus.
2 Particulars in Kuhnert, p. 41, note 7. With regard to the later Jewish usage, cf. Schwab, Coupes ὦ imscriptions magiques in the Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archeology, xiii. (1890-91), p. 585 f., and J. Wohlstein, Uber eimige aramiische Inschriften auf Thongefdssen des kgl. Museums zu Berlin, in the Zeitschrift fiir Assyriologie, viii. (1893), p. 331, and ix. (1894), p19 τς
3 Notices et extraits des manuscrits de la bibliothéque impériale, vol. xviii., pt. 2, Paris, 1865, p. 425.
284 BIBLE STUDIES. [38, 39
similarly 11 “5; and with the idea, φοβερός ἐστιν ἐπὶ πάντας τοὺς θεούς; Ps. 95 [96].
Line 10 f. τὸν κτίσαντα τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ τὴν θάλασσαν; an echo of Gen. 1!, not in expression,” but in sense, like LXX Gen. 14™ ”, 1 [3] Esd. 6%, Bel®, ‘cf. Rev: 10°, and with this LXX Ps. 145 [146]®. The collocation Heaven and sea instead of Heaven and earth is surprising in this connection, but it is not foreign to the O.T. An exhaus- tive collection of the many variants—echoes of Gen. 1'— for Creator of the heavens and the earth in Judeo-Hellenistic and early Christian literature which have become formulaic, would be an important contribution to the history of the text of the ‘‘ Apostolic’ Symbol.
Line 11. τὸν διαχωρίσαντα τοὺς εὐσεβεῖς can only mean, he who separates the devout ones, 1.6., from the godless ; διαχωρίζω = to separate from is common in the
LXX. The passage is an allusion to Sir. 36 [383]"" ἐν
'h > ,ὔ / / > ‘ πλήθει ἐπιστήμης κύριος διεχώρισεν αὐτοὺς (Men) : SO we have the contrast ἀπέναντι εὐσεβοῦς ἁμαρτωλός (in ver. 1).
Line 12. tov διαστήσαντα τὴν ῥάβδον ἐν τῇ Oa- λάσσῃ, literally, he who divides his staff in the sea. This 15, of course, meaningless; the first writer of the incantation, without doubt, wrote inversely: tov διαστήσαντα τὴν θάλασ- σαν ἐν TH ῥάβδῳ or τῇ ῥάβδῳ, who divided the sea with his staff, an allusion in sense to LXX Exod. 14%": εἶπε δὲ κύριος πρὸς Motch... καὶ σὺ ἔπαρον τῇ ῥάβδῳ σου καὶ ἔκτεινον τὴν χεῖρά σου ἐπὶ τὴν θάλασσαν καὶ ῥῆξον αὐτήν, with the difference that in the Bible it 15 Moses who lifts the staff—though of
course at God’s command. In regard to form its similarity
with Theodotion Ps. 73 [74]%:% σὺ (God) διέστησας ἐν τῇ
1 With regard to the whole expression, cf. the passage of the afore- mentioned leaden tablet from Carthagein Bull. de corr. hell., xii., 302 = CIL. vili., Suppl. i., No. 12511: ἐξορκίζω ὑμᾶς κατὰ τοῦ ἐπάνω Tov οὐρανοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ καθημένου ἐπὶ τῶν χερουβι, 6 διορίσας τὴν γῆν καὶ χωρίσας τὴν θάλασσαν, law κτλ. The nominatives are illustrative of the formal rigidity of these expressions.
* Aquila alone has ἔκτισεν (F. Field, Origenis Hexaplorum quae supersunt 2 tomi, Oxonii, 1875, i., p. 7).
5. Field, ii., p. 217.
39, 40] A SEPTUAGINT MEMORIAL. 285
δυνάμει σου τὴν θάλασσαν, with which should be compared LXX Exod. 155: καὶ διὰ πνεύματος τοῦ θυμοῦ σου διέστη τὸ ὕδωρ... ἐπάγη τὰ κύματα τῆς θαλάσσης. The miracle at the Red Sea, so frequently celebrated in the Psalms and elsewhere, is also alluded to in other Magical formulz.! See under ἐν, above, Art. 11., upon the possible ἐν τῇ ῥάβδῳ.
Line 16. τὸν ποιήσαντα τὴν ἡμίονον μὴ τεκεῖν, a most peculiar designation of God. It does not occur, as such, in the Old Testament, but the underlying idea of God’s providentia specialissima for the animals is very similarly ex- pressed in the sublime address of Jahweh to the doubting Job (Job 88 ff.) ; of., in particular, 391%: Knowest thou the time when the wild goats of the rock bring forth ? Or canst thou mark when the hinds do calve ὁ Canst thou number the months that they fulfil, or knowest thou the time when they bring forth? They bow themselves, they bring forth their young, they cast out their sorrows. It is God who directs all this. Just as He gives young to the wild goats and the hinds, so, the present passage would say, He has made the mule to be barren. The barren- ness of the mule is often mentioned in the Mishna;? it was manifestly a fact of great interest in the Jewish Philosophy of Nature, as also in Greek and Latin authors:* Plin. Nat. Hist. vil. 173: observatum ex duobus diversis generibus nata tertii generis fiert et neutri parentium esse similia, eaque ipsa quae sunt ita nata non gignere in omni animaliwm genere, idcirco mulas non parere. When Zopyrus was besieging Babylon he received, according to Herod. iii. 153, the oracle ἐπεώνπερ ἡμίονοι τέκω- σιν, τότε TO τεῖχος ἁλώσεσθαι. The partus of a mule was reckoned a prodigium: Cic. de Div. 11. 2249, 2861, Liv. xxxvii. 33, Juv. xiii. 64, Sueton. Galba, 4, and this explains the Roman proverb cwm mula peperit, i.e., never. Then the fact played a great part in incantations. Gargilius Martialis
1 Cf. A. Dieterich, Abraxas, p. 139 f.
2 Hamburger, i.* (1892), p. 735.
3 Heim, 493 f. The passages which follow, to which the author’s notice was directed by A. Dieterich, are taken from Heim. Cf. also Centuria illustrium quaestionum ...a Joh. Jac. Hermanno, Herbornensi, Herbornae Nassoviorum, 1615, decas septima, quaestio quinta.
286 BIBLE STUDIES. [40, 41
(third cent. A.D.) in de cura bowm ὃ 19 (ed. Schuch)! hands down the following healing charm: nec lapis lanam fert, nec lumbricus oculos habet, nec mula parit utriculwm ; similarly Marcellus (fifth cent. A.D.), De Medicam. vii. 191 (ed. Helm- reich) :? nec mula parit nec lapis lanam fert nec hwic morbo caput crescat aut si creverit tabescat, and a Codex Vossianus ed. Piechotta Anecd. lat. clxx.:* ‘‘ quod mula non parit”’ et exspues, “nec cantharus aquam bibit”’ et exspues, ‘‘nec palumba dentes habet”’ et exspues, ‘‘ sic mihi dentes non doleant”’ et expues. Finally, reference must be made to a passage in the Leiden copy of the Codex Corbeiensis of Vegetius,* which gives the formula: focus alget, aqua sitit, cibaria esurit, mula parit, tasca masca venas omnes. But what comes nearest to our passage is a sentence preserved in a poem of the Codex Vindobonensis, 93:° herbula Proserpinacia, Horci regis filia, quomodo clausisti mule partum, sic claudas et undam sanguinis huius, and in a still more instructive form in the Codex Bonnensis, 218 (66 a): ° herbula Proserpinatia, Horct regis filia, adiuro te per tuas virtutes, ut quomodo clausisti partum mulae, claudas undas sanguinis hurus. Strange as at first sight the affirmation thus made of God may appear in connection with the others, we now see that in an incantation it is least of all strange. The Jewish com- piler of our text borrowed it from pagan sources, probably unconsciously but perhaps intentionally using ἃ biblical phrase—and, indeed, the intention did not directly oppose the biblical range of thought.
Linel6f. tov διορίσαντα τὸ φῶς ἀπὸ τοῦ σκότους: ο΄. LXX Gen. 14, καὶ διεχώρισεν ὁ θεὸς ἀνὰ μέσον τοῦ φωτὸς καὶ ἀνὰ μέσον τοῦ cxoTous—similarly Gen. 118, The compiler quotes freely : διορίζειν, frequent elsewhere in the LXX, also with ἀπό, does not stand in any of the Greek translations of this passage. It 15 significant that he has avoided the repeated ‘“between,” a Hebraism taken over by the LXX.
1 Heim, 493 f. 2 Tbid. 3 Tbid.
4In M. thm, Incantamenta magica, Rh. Mus. f. Phil., N. F., xviii. (1893), p. 635.
5 Heim, pp. 488, 547. ὃ Thid., p. 554.
OO
41, 42] A SEPTUAGINT MEMORIAL. 287
Line 17. tov συντρίβοντα tas πέτρας: an echo in form of LXX 1 Kings 19", πνεῦμα péya . . συντρῖβον πέτρας ἐνώπιον κυρίου: cf. LXX Nah. 1°, καὶ ai πέτραι διε- θρύβησαν ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ.
Line 18. τὸν ἀπορρήξαντα τὰ ὄρη: ο΄. LXX Ps. 77 [78] διέρρηξε πέτραν ἐν ἐρήμῳ, similarly Ps. 104 [106] ἢ; parallels to the thought are easily found.
Line 18 f. τὸν συνστρέφοντα τὴν γῆν ἐπὶ τῶν θεμελίων αὐτῆς: συστρέφω, current in the LXX, though not in this connection; τὰ θεμέλια τῆς γῆς is likewise frequent. With regard to the sense, cf. LXX Prov. 8” ἰσχυρὰ ἐποίει τὰ θεμέλια τῆς γῆς, and the common phrase ἐθεμελίωσε τὴν γῆν.
Line 19 ff. ὁρκίζω σε τὸ ἅγιον ὄνομα ὃ οὐ λέγεται": It is possible to doubt this punctuation. Mas- pero writes ὃ οὐ λέγεται ἐν TO ἀδύτῳ, but if the reading ἀδύτῳ is correct, then, with his punctuation, the thought would be in direct opposition to the Jewish view, for the Temple was just the one place in which the name of God could be pronounced ; Philo, De Vit. Mos. iii. 11 (M., p. 152), says . . ὀνόματος ὃ μόνοις τοῖς ὦτα Kal γλῶτταν σοφίᾳ κεκαθαρμένοις θέμις ἀκούειν καὶ λέγειν ἐν ἁγίοις, ἄλλῳ δὲ οὐδενὶ τὸ παράπαν οὐδαμοῦ. The Mischna, Tamid, vu. 2,1 has ‘‘In the Temple the name of God is pronounced as it is written ; in the land [elsewhere] another title is substituted’’. We consider it absolutely impossible that any one having any kind of sympathy with Judaism whatever could assert that the holy name was not pronounced in the Temple. If the word read by Maspero as ἀδύτῳ can be made out at all—which to us, judging at least from the fac-simile, appears impossible—then, if it is to be read after ὃ οὐ λέγεται, it must be a general term of place such as κόσμῳ or λαῷ; if, again, itis to be connected with the following ὀνομάσω αὐτό, then ἐν τῷ ἀδύτῳ Were meaningless, or at least very singular. Of which Temple could the Jewish compiler be thinking? Can it be that he
1 Hamburger, i.*, p. 53; Schiirer, ii., p. 381 (= ii. p. 458). [Eng. Trans., ii., ii., p. 82, note 143.]
288 BIBLE STUDIES. [42, 43
wrote before the destruction of the Temple?! We would therefore propose to consider ὃ ov λέγεται as a clause by itself: it expresses the well-known Jewish idea that the name of God is an ὄνομα dppyntov,—see LXX Ley. 24 ὀνομάζων δὲ TO ὄνομα κυρίου θανάτῳ θανατούσθω; Josephus, Antt. 11.124: καὶ ὁ θεὸς αὐτῷ σημαίνει τὴν ἑαυτοῦ προσηγορίαν οὐ πρότερον εἰς ἀνθρώπους παρελθοῦσαν, περὶ ἧς οὔ μοι θεμιτὸν εἰπεῖν."- ἐν τῷ [...]@ ὀνομάσω αὐτὸ καὶ οἱ δαίμονες ἐξεγερθῶσιν ἔκθαμβοι καὶ περίφοβοι γενόμενοι. How the lacuna after ἐν τῷ is to be filled up the present writer does not know, and he will make no conjectures ; thus much only is probable, viz., that what stood there was a designation of place or time. The magician utters the severest possible threat against the demon; he will, in order to win him over, pronounce the unutterable Name of God, the very sound of which fills the demons with shudder- ing and dread. That demons and spirits are controlled by the mention of sacred names has remained to the present day one of the most important ideas in magic.? We have no direct example of this in the LXX, but we can point to James 2' as being valid for biblical times, καὶ ta δαιμόνια πιστεύουσιν Kal φρίσσουσιν, which presupposes the same fearful impression upon the demons of the thought of God. With this is to be compared Pap. Lond. xlvi. 801. (fourth cent. A.D.), Where the Demon is adjured κατὰ τῶν φρικτῶν ὀνομά- των, just as Josephus, Bell. Jud. v. 103, speaks of the φρικτὸν ὄνομα Tov θεοῦ. The overwhelming effect of the Divine name upon the Demons was a very familiar idea in post-biblical Judaism.”
1 Moreover, ἄδυτον is very infrequent in “ biblical” literature ; it is found only in LXX 2 Chron. 88 34, Cod. A.
2 Cf. Hamburger, i.*, p. 52 ff., with reference to the point as viewed by post-biblical Judaism.
3 And not in magic only!
4 Kenyon, p. 68; Wessely, i., p. 129. More definitely still in Pap. Lugd. J 384, iv. uf. (Fleck. Jbb. Suppl. xvi., p. 800; Leemans, ii., p. 17): μέλλω τὸ μέγα bvoua λέγειν Awd (Or Θωθ), dv... πᾶς δαίμων φρίσσει.
> Of., e.g., Hamburger, ii., pp. 283 and 75; also J. A. Hisenmenger, Entdecktes Judenthum, 1700, i., p. 165; the present author cites this work
as ΓΝ

48, 44] A SEPTUAGINT MEMORIAL. 289
Line 23. ἤδη ταχύ, cf. line 47, ἤδη ἤδη ταχὺ ταχύ: a very frequent concluding formula in the incantations,! which is still seen, eg., on Coptic amulets of the 5th-6th and 11th centuries ;? it is also to be restored, of course, at the end of the previously-cited Inscription from Carthage.’ ταχύ for ταχέως is very common in the LXX.
Line 23 ff. τὸν φωστῆρα καὶ ἄστρα ἐν οὐρανῷ ποιήσαντα: ΤΙΧΧ Gen. 116", καὶ ἐποίησεν ὁ θεὸς τοὺς δύο φωστῆρας τοὺς μεγάλους... καὶ τοὺς ἀστέρας. The single φωστήρ mentioned in the Tablet, since it is associated with the stars, is probably the moon; the moon is also named φωστήρ by Aquila and Symmachus, Ps. 73 [74]'°4—éca φωνῆς προστάγματος αὐτοῦ: the acts of creation take place at the command of God—LXX Ps. 32 [83]%, ὅτι αὐτὸς εἶπε Kal ἐγενήθησαν, αὐτὸς ἐνετείλατο καὶ ἐκτίσθησαν ; in respect of form should be compared the not infrequent phrases of the LXX, διὰ φωνῆς κυρίου and διὰ προστάγματος κυρίους Observe the so-called ‘‘ Hebraising”’ periphrasis ὅ of the preposition διά by διὰ φωνῆς, which a Greek might feel to be a pleonasm, but which is not altogether un-Greek. --ὥστε φαίνειν πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις: LXX Gen. 17 καὶ
according to the copy in his possession, which was ostensibly printed in the year after the birth of Christ 1700, but as it announces itself as Des sic bey 40. Jahr von der Judenschafft mit Arrest bestrickt gewesene, nun- mehro aber Durch Autoritdt eines Hohen Reichs-Vicariats relaxirte Johann Andreé Eisenmengers ... Entdecktes Judenthum, it could manifestly have been printed at the earliest in 1740. The explanation probably is that, in the copies of the edition of 1700 (cf. C. Siegfried in the Allg. deutschen Bio- graphie, v. [1877], p. 772 ff.), the interdict on which was cancelled about 1740, the original title-page was supplanted by the present misleading one.
1 Cf. Wessely’s Index sub ἤδη.
2. Krall, Koptische Amulete, in Mittheilungen aus der Sammlung der Fapyrus Erzherzog Rainer V. Vienna, 1892, pp. 118, 121.
3 Delattre, in Bulletin de correspondance hellénique, xii. (1888), p. 302, takes from the unmistakeable HAHHAHTAXYTA the extraordinary reading “ἤδη, ἤδη, ταῦτα (?)”’.
4 Field, ii., p. 218.
5 Of. A. Buttmann, Grammatik des neutestamentlichen Sprachgebrauchs, Berlin, 1859, pp. 78, 158, 162, 273 f. As to the questionableness of commonly asserting such periphrases to be ““ Hebraising,’’ see above II., swb κατά.
1
290 BIBLE STUDIES. [44, 45
ἔθετο αὐτοὺς ὁ θεὸς ἐν τῷ στερεώματι TOD οὐρανοῦ ὥστε φαίνειν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς.
Line 25 f. τὸν συνσείσαντα πᾶσαν τὴν οἰκου- μένην: LXX Ps. 59 [60]*, συνέσεισας τὴν γῆν. For πᾶσαν τὴν οἰκουμένην, cf. ΤΙΧΧ Is. 13°.—xal τὰ ὄρη ἐκτραχηλί- ζοντα καὶ ἐκβράζοντα:" a repetition of the thought in line 18, but verbally independent.
Line 26f. tov ποιοῦντα ἔκτρομον τὴν γῆν ἅπασ(αν): cf. LXX Ps. 108 [104] 83 ὁ ἐπιβλέπων ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν καὶ ποιῶν αὐτὴν τρέμειν ; ἔκτρομος does not seem to have been retained anywhere else, the LXX using ἔντρομος in the same sense, Peli (is) and ΤΠ {ΠῚ
Line 27. (καὶ) καινίζοντα πάντας τοὺς κατοι- κοῦντας: the author follows Maspero in adding the καί. We may reject the idea that καινίζοντα has an ethical refer- ence in the sense of the πνεῦμα καινόν of Ezek. 111, cf. Ps. 50 [51], or of the καρδία καινή of Ezek. 36%; we must rather take it as expressing the idea of the preservation of the race by the ceaseless upspringing of new generations. The compiler may have had a confused recollection of phrases like ἐπέβλεψεν ἐπὶ πάντας τοὺς κατοικοῦντας τὴν γῆν, LXX Ps. 82 [33], and κύριος ὁ θεὸς... καινιεῖ σε ἐν τῇ ἀγαπήσει αὐτοῦ, Zeph. 8177; cf. Ps. 102 [103]°, ἀνακαινι- σθήσεται ὡς ἀετοῦ ἡ νεότης σου. In Wisdom 7”, τὰ πάντα καινίζει 1s predicated of the divine σοφία.
Line 27 f. τὸν ποιήσαντα σημεῖα ἐν οὐρανῷ καὶ ἐπὶ γῆς καὶ θαλάσσης: see Dan. 6” καὶ ποιεῖ σημεῖα καὶ τέρατα ἐν τῷ οὐρωνῷ καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, cf. LXX Joel 2”.
Line 31. ἐρωτῶντα: here, as often in Paul, Synopt., Acts, John, in the sense of beg, beseech ; not ‘‘ an application of the word which was manifestly first made through the
influence of the Hebrew 5s’? (which in that case must
1 ἐκβράζω, LXX Neh. 1378, 2 Macc. 112, 58 (Cod. A). 2H. Cremer, Biblisch-theologisches Woirterbuch der Neutestamentlichen Grdcitét, 7 Gotha, 1893, p. 393 (= °[1895], p. 415).

45, 46] A SEPTUAGINT MEMORIAL. 291
surely have appeared first of all in the LXX), but popular Greek.!
Line 33. ὃν φοβεῖται ὄρη καὶ νάπαι: instead of the unmistakable ὅν Maspero writes οὗ. A specialising of the idea that the earth also has a ‘“‘fear of God”: cf. LXX Ps. 32 [98]8, φοβηθήτω Tov κύριον πᾶσα ἡ γῆ, and Ps. 66 [67], φοβηθήτωσαν αὐτὸν πάντα τὰ πέρατα τῆς γῆς. For the com- bination of ὄρη and νάπαι cf. LXX Is. 4013, Ezek. 63, 36°.
Line 34. δι᾽ ὃν ὁ λέων ἀφίησιν τὸ ἅρπαγμα: the fact stated in this connection vividly recalls τὸν ποιήσαντα τὴν ἡμίονον μὴ τεκεῖν in line 16. It is surprising that it should be said that God causes the hon to abandon his prey,” whereas the biblical idea is just that God supplies the lion’s food, Job 38*°. One might suppose an allusion to Dan. 6”, ὅστις ἐξείλατο τὸν Δανιὴλ ἐκ χειρὸς τῶν λεόντων, and similar passages, the more so as a little before, in line 27 f., there was a strong resemblance to the first half of the same verse ; but this may be considered as negatived by ἅρπαγμα. We shall not err in considering the statement to be an ex- pression of God’s omnipotence, of His complete dominion over nature: God is even able to make possible that which is against nature, viz., that the lion shall relinquish his prey. We may be reminded by this of the prophetic pictures of the Messianic future in Is. 11°, καὶ μοσχάριον καὶ ταῦρος Kal λέων ἅμα βοσκηθήσονται καὶ παιδίον μικρὸν ἄξει αὐτούς, and 15. 65” Ξ- 117, καὶ λέων ὡς βοῦς φάγεται ἄχυρα, in which it is Ππ|6- wise affirmed that the hon may change his nature, if God so wills it. The clause has been freely compiled from biblical materials.—xal ta ὄρη τρέμει: LXX Jer. 45 εἶδον τὰ ὄρη καὶ ἣν τρέμοντα.
Line 85. ἕκαστος ἰδάλλεται ὃν ἔχει φόβος τοῦ Κυρίου: perhaps this is the most difficult passage in the Inscription. ἐδάλλομαι (εἰδώλλομαι) or ἰνδάλλομαι Means to seem, appear, become visible, show oneself, also to resemble. The
1U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff in Guil. Schmidt’s De Flavia Iosepu elocutione observationes criticae, Fleck. Jbb. Suppl. xx. (1894), p. 516.
2 ἅρπαγμα is used for the lion’s prey in LXX Hzek. 22°; cf. 1955,
292 BIBLE STUDIES. [46, 47
word does not occur in the LXX, but ἴνδαλμα, the noun, 15 found in Jer. 27 [50]*, probably in the sense of ghost, in Wisd. 17° for image, which meanings are easily obtained from the verb. The first appearance of the verb in biblico- ecclesiastical literature, so far as the author knows, is in Clement of Rome, 1 Cor. 237, διὸ μὴ διψυχῶμεν μηδὲ cvdar- λέσθω ἡ ψυχὴ ἡμῶν ἐπὶ ταῖς ὑπερβαλλούσαις καὶ ἐνδόξοις δωρεαῖς αὐτοῦ (God), where either it has the meaning to seem, imagine oneself, somewhat like φυσιοῦσθαι, or it 15, as Bryennios, following others, has recently again proposed, a synonym of the verbs ἐλιγγιᾶν, to be confused, and ἐνδοιάξζειν, to waver! Now ἕκαστον ἰδάλλεται, as the passage runs in the original, does not give sense: Maspero conjectures ὃν ἕκα- στος εἰδάλλεται and translates ἃ qui chacun devient sembl- able, which appears to us to be grammatically impossible. In regard to the reading which we propose, which may re- commend itself by the insignificance of the textual change, we would refer to the explanation of the verb which is given by Hesychius: ἰνδάλλεται ὁμοιοῦται, φαίνεται, δοκεῖ, στοχάζεται, ἰσοῦται, σοφίζεται with which is to be compared the note of Suidas: εἰδαλίμας: συνετάς. Taking then ἐδάλλεται = codifera,? we get the familiar biblical thought’ that the Fear of God gives men Wisdom, as in ΤΙΧΧ Ps. 110 [111] = Prov. 17, 9” ἀρχὴ σοφίας φόβος κυρίου, Prov. 224 γενεὰ σοφίας φόβος κυρίου; cf. Ps. 18 [19]® 29x) μαρτυρία κυρίου πιστὴ σοφίζουσα νήπια... . ὁ φόβος κυρίου ἁγνὸς διαμένων εἰς αἰῶνα αἰῶνος. The only possible objection to this explanation is that the clause has no con- nection with the previous one; and certainly a καὶ or the repetition of the δι’ dv were desirable—only it would be equally required with any other reading. The writer of the tablet seems not to have understood the statement.—
1 Further particulars in Patrwm Apostolicorum opera rece. O. de Geb- hardt, A. Harnack, Th. Zahn, fasc. i., part. 1.5, Leipzig, 1876, p. 42.
2 σοφίζομαι sapiens fio, sapio, often in LXX, e.g., 1 Kings 477]; specially frequent in Sir.
3 The vor media ἰνδάλλομαι would then stand here sensu bono, 88 in Clem. Rom. 1 Cor. 23? sensu malo.

47, 48] A SEPTUAGINT MEMORIAL. 293
With regard to ὃν éyet φόβος Tod κυρίου (cf. LXX Job 31 33 φόβος yap κυρίου συνέσχε pe), reference should be made to the equivalent (in profane Greek likewise common) use of ἔχειν, LXX Job 21°, Is. 13°, Mark 16%. Examples of φόβος τοῦ κυρίου would be superfluous.
Line 36. ἀθανάτου: Sir. 51°"! Cod. A has καὶ ἀπὸ ἀθανάτου ῥύσεως ἐδεήθην, which probably means and to the Immortal One did I pray for deliverance; cf. 1 Tim. 6", ὁ μόνος ἔχων ἀθανασίαν. The thought is a Greek one; this attribute of God, in the present connection (cf. line 35), recalls the sub- lime Hellenistic-Jewish thought that the knowledge of God, the possession of the divine σοφία and δικαιοσύνη, impart immortality: Wisd. 15% εἰδέναι cov τὸ κράτος pita ἀθανασίας, 8" ἔστιν ἀθανασία ἐν συγγενείᾳ σοφίας, cf. ver. 15, ἕξω δι
1_qmapyre-
αὐτὴν ἀθανασίαν, 1 15 δικαιοσύνη yap ἀθανασία ἐστίν. gdomtov:” Add. Esth. 5! τὸν πάντων ἐπόπτην θεόν; 8 Macc. 231 ὁ πάντων ἐπόπτης θεός; 2 Macc. 7* (cf. 8 339) τοῦ παντο- κράτορος ἐπόπτου θεοῦ; cf. ΤΙΧΧ Job 34% ὁ γὰρ κύριος πάντας (Cod. A, τὰ πάντα) ἐφορᾷ, similarly 2 Macc. 12” and 152..-μισοπονήρου: the idea is common in the O.T.;* in regard to the word cf. μισοπονηρέω, ἃ Macc. 4* and 84;
μισοπονηρία, 2 Macc. 31.
Line 36 ff. ἐπισταμένου κτλ.: a well-known biblical idea, here developed independently with the assistance of biblical expressions.
Line 438. συμβιοῦντας: Sir. 13° has the word.
Line 45. ἐπιθυμοῦντα with the Accusative as not infrequently in LXX; cf., ¢e.g., Exod. 20", οὐκ ἐπιθυμήσεις τὴν γυναῖκα τοῦ πλησίον σου.
Looking again at the Inscription, we find, in the first place, confirmation of the supposition that the writer of the
1 Cf. also Aquila Ps. 47 [48]! and the observations of Field, ii., p. 169, thereon.
2 Re the vulgar φ cf. Winer-Schmiedel, ὃ 5, 27e (p. 59 ff.) : ἐφόπτας is also found in Pap. Par. Bibl. nat. 1353 (Wessely, i., p. 78).
5 Cf. also LXX Ps. 96 [97]?° οἱ ἀγαπῶντες τὸν κύριον μισεῖτε πονηρόν.
294 BIBLE STUDIES. [48, 49
tablet, whether male or female, and the original author of the text cannot have been the same individual. No one apparently so familiar with even the deeper thoughts of the Greek Bible could fall into such childish errors in the most everyday matters, such as the names of the patriarchs and other things. It is in all probability most correct to suppose that the tablet (with the exception of such parts as referred to the particular case) was copied from a book of Magic, and that even there the original text was already corrupt. If the tablet was itself written in the third century, and if between it and the compiler of the original text there was already a considerable period, in which corrupt copies were produced and circulated, then the second century A.D. will probably form a terminus ad quem for the date of its composi- tion ; nevertheless there is nothing to prevent our assigning to the original text a still earlier date.
As the locality of the original composition we may assume Keypt, perhaps Alexandria, not only from the general character of the text, but also by reason of the Egyptian origin of texts which are cognate with it.
The author was a Greek Jew:' this follows incontro- vertibly, as it seems to us, from the formal character of the text. If we had in the incantation a succession of verbal citations from the Septuagint, the hypothesis of a Jewish author were certainly the most natural, but we should then have to reckon also with the presumption that some “heathen,” convinced of the magic power of the alien God, may have taken the sayings from the mysterious pages of the holy and not always intelligible Book of this same God, very much in the same way as passages at large from Homer? were written down for magical purposes, and as to this day amulets are made from biblical sayings.? Really
1A. Hilgenfeld in Berl. Philol. Wochenschrift xvi. (1896), p. 647 ἢ., considers that the author was a follower of the Samaritan Simon Magus.
2 Cf. with reference to ‘‘ Homeromancy,” especially Pap. Lond. cxxi. (third century Α.}.), and the remarks upon this of Kenyon, p. 83 f.
3A. Wuttke, Der deutsche Volksaberglaube der Gegenwart, 2nd edition, thoroughly revised, Berlin, 1869, p. 321 f.

49, 50] A SEPTUAGINT MEMORIAL. 295
verbal quotations, however, such as could be copied mechani- cally, are almost entirely absent from our text, in spite of its extreme dependence in substance and form upon the Greek Old Testament. We have here an instructive ex- ample of the reproduction of biblical passages from memory which played such a great part in quotations and allusions in the early Christian writings. The compiler of our text certainly did not consult his Greek Bible as he set down one biblical attribute of God after another; the words flowed from his pen without any consideration on his part of what might be their particular origin, or any thought of checking the letters in a scrupulous bibliolatry. Only a man who lived and moved in the Bible, and, indeed, in the Greek Bible, could write as he wrote. And if here and there some- thing got mixed with his writing which has no authority in the Septuagint, then even that speaks not against, but in favour of, our view. For the theological conception of the Canon has never been a favourite with popular religion,—we might almost say, indeed, with religion in general. In every age the religious instinct has shown an indifference in re- spect to the Canon,—unconscious, unexpressed, but none the less effective—which has violated it both by narrowing it and extending it. How many words of the canonical Bible have never yet been able to effect what Holy Scripture should! How much that is extra-canonical has filled whole genera- tions with solace and gladness and religious enthusiasm ! Just as the Christians of New Testament times not infre- quently quoted as scripture words for which one should have vainly sought in the Canon (assuming that even then an exact demarcation had been made, or was known), so also does this text from Adrumetum, with all its obligations to the Bible, manifest an ingenuous independence with regard to the Canon.
In respect of form, the following facts also merit atten- tion. The text is almost wholly free from those grammatical peculiarities of the Septuagint which are usually spoken of as Hebraisms—a term easily misunderstood. This is a proof of the fact, for which there is other evidence as
296 BIBLE STUDIES. [50, 51
well,! that the syntactic ‘‘influence”’ of the Alexandrian trans- lation was less powerful by far than the lexical. The spirit of the Greek language was, in the imperial period, sufficiently accommodating where the enlarging of its stock of terms was concerned; the good old words were becoming worn out, and gropings were being made towards new ones and towards the stores of the popular language—as if internal deterioration could be again made good by means of external enlargement. But notwithstanding all this it had a sense of reserve quite sufficient to ward off the claims of a logic which was repugnant to its nature. The alleged ‘“‘ Jewish-Greek,”’ of which the Alexandrian translation of the Old Testament is supposed to be the most prominent memorial, never existed as a living dialect at all. Surely no one would seriously affirm that the clumsy barbarisms of the Aramzean who tried to make himself understood in the Greek tongue were prescribed by the rules of a “Jewish-Greek” grammar. It may be, indeed, that certain peculiarities, particularly with regard to the order of words, are frequently repeated, but one has no right to search after the rules of syntax of a “ Semitic Greek ’’ on the basis of these peculiarities, any more than one should have in trying to put together a syntax of ‘“‘ English High- German” from the similar idioms of a German-speaking Englishman. We need not be led astray by the observed fact that Greek translations of Semitic originals manifest a more or less definite persistence of Semitisms; for this per- sistence is not the product of a dialect which arose and developed in the Ghettos of Alexandria and Rome, but the disguised conformity to rule of the Semitic original, which was often plastered over rather than translated. How comes it that the syntax of the Jew Philo and the Benjamite Paul stands so distinctly apart from that of such Greek transla- tions? Just because, though they had grown up in the Law, and meditated upon it day and night, they were yet Alexandrian and Tarsian respectively, and as such fitted their words naturally together, just as people spoke in Egypt
1 Gf. the author’s sketch entitled Die newtestamentliche Formel ‘in Christo Jesu” untersucht, Marburg, 1892, p. 66 f.

51, 52] A SEPTUAGINT MEMORIAL. 297
and Asia Minor, and not in the manner of the clumsy pedan- try | of the study, submitting line after line to the power of an alien spirit. The translators of the Old Testament were Hellenists as well as were Philo and Paul, but they clothed themselves in a strait-jacket—in the idea perhaps that such holy labour demanded the putting on of a priestly garment. Their work gained a success such as has fallen to the lot of but few books: it became one of the “great powers” of history. But although Greek Judaism and Christianity entered into, and lived in, the sphere of its ideas, yet their faith and their language remained so uninjured that no one thought of the disguised Hebrew as being sacred, least of all as worthy of imitation,?—though, of course, there was but little reflection on the matter.
Then the Tablet from Adrumetum manifests a pecu- harity, well known in the literature of Hellenistic Judaism which, we think, ought also to be considered as one of form. This is the heaping up of attributes of God, which appears to have been a favourite custom, especially in prayers. It is a characteristic of certain heathen prayers ; it was believed that the gods were honoured, and that the bestowal of their favours was influenced,‘ by the enumera-
1 We would point out that this judgment upon the LXX refers only to its syntax. But even in this respect the investigation of Egyptian and vernacular Greek will, as it advances, reveal that many things that have hitherto been considered as Semitisms are in reality Alexandrianisms or popular idioms. With regard to the vocabulary the translators have achieved fair results, and have not seldom treated their original with absolute freedom. This matter has been more thoroughly treated in Articles II. and III. of the present work.
2The Synoptic Gospels, for instance, naturally occupy a special position, in so far as their constituent parts go back in some way to Aramaic sources. But the syntactic parallels to the LXX which they show are not so much an “after-effect”’ of that book as a consequence of the similarity of their respective originals.
3 Grimm, HApAT. iv. (1857), p. 45.
4Grimm, ibid. The ὑμνῳδία κρυπτή of Hermes Trismegistos (given by A. Dieterich in Abravas, p. 67), for example, affords information on this point, though, of course, it is very markedly pervaded by biblical elements.
298 BIBLE STUDIES. [52, 53
tion ‘of their attributes. We think it probable that this notion also influenced the form of Judeo-Greek prayers.1 At all events we hear in them the expression of the same naive tendency which Grimm unjustifiably reproaches as ‘‘a misunderstanding of and lack of the true spirit of prayer ἡ Good words were given to God—something must be given: His divine self-importance, as it were, was appealed to. It is children that flatter thus. With regard to this char- acteristic in prayer, unmistakably present also in our text, compare the prayer of the Three Men, then 3 Macc. 2?™ and 6°", but specially the following passages :—
2 Macc. 1%*: κύριε κύριε ὁ θεὸς ὁ πάντων κτίστης ὁ φοβερὸς καὶ ἰσχυρὸς καὶ δίκαιος καὶ ἐλεήμων, ὁ μόνος βασιλεὺς καὶ χρηστὸς ὁ μόνος χορηγὸς ὁ μόνος δίκαιος καὶ παντοκράτωρ καὶ αἰώνιος, ὁ διασώζων τὸν ᾿Ισραὴλ ἐκ παντὸςϊκακοῦ, ὁ ποιήσας τοὺς πατέρας ἐκλεκτοὺς καὶ ἁγιάσας αὐτούς.
Prayer οἱ Manasses (in O. F. Fritzsche, Libri apocr. V. T. graece, p. 92)'4: κύριε παντοκράτωρ ὁ θεὸς τῶν πατέρων ἡμῶν τοῦ ᾿Αβραὰμ καὶ ᾿Ισαὰκ καὶ ᾿]ακὼβ καὶ τοῦ σπέρματος αὐτῶν τοῦ δικαίου, ὁ ποιήσας τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ τὴν γῆν σὺν παντὶ τῷ κόσμῳ αὐτῶν, ὁ πεδήσας τὴν θάλασσαν τῷ λόγῳ τοῦ προσ- τάἀγματός σου, ὁ κλείσας τὴν ἄβυσσον καὶ σφραγισάμενος αὐτὴν τῷ φοβερῷ καὶ ἐνδόξῳ ὀνόματί σου, ὃν πάντα φρίσσει καὶ τρέμει ἀπὸ προσώπου δυνάμεώς σου.
The agreement, especially of the latter passage, with the tablet of Adrumetum is so striking that we should have to suppose that our compiler used the Prayer of Manasses, unless the case was that both were working with the same materials in the same framework of a customary form. That this form came in course of time to be of great influence liturgically, and that it can still be perceived in the monotony of many a service-book prayer, can only be indicated here. It is doubtless a partial cause of the fact that the word Litanei, in our customary speech, has gained an unpleasant secondary signification. [Litanei = litany + jeremiad. ]
The peculiarity just treated of was described as a formal one. For even if its origin points, psychologically, to a
1 Observe, however, the form seen already in certain Psalms.

rr
58, 54] A SEPTUAGINT MEMORIAL. 299
temper of mind not entirely alien to religion, yet the employ- ment of it, where the religious motive has given place to the liturgical, the unconstrained feeling of the true worshipper to the literary interest of the prayer-book writer, is in general purely ritualistic, that is, formal. But the attributes of God which are found in the text from Adrumetum are of deep interest even in substance, when considered in reference to the choice which the compiler has made. It is true that they are here used as the vehicle of an incantation, but how different is their simplicity and intelligibility from the meaningless chaos of most other incantamenta! The' context in which they stand must not cause us to ignore their re- ligious value. If we put aside the adjuration of the demon for the trivial ends of a sickly affection, we are enabled to gain a notion of how the unknown author thought about God. The suspicion that he was an impostor and that he intentionally employed the biblical expressions as hocus- pocus is perhaps not to be flatly denied; but there is nothing to justify it, and to assert, without further consideration, that the literary representatives of magic were swindlers, would be to misapprehend the tremendous force with which the popular mind in all ages has been ruled by the ‘“‘ super- stitious ’ notion that the possession of supernatural powers may be secured through religion. Our compiler, just because of the relative simplicity of his formule, has the right to be taken in earnest. What strikes us most of all in these are the thoughts which establish the omnipotence of God. The God, through Whom he adjures the demon, is for him the creator, the preserver and the governor of nature in its widest sense: He has, of course, the power to crush the miserable spirit of the tomb. But besides this conception of God, which impresses the senses more strongly than the conscience, and upon which the poetry of biblical and post-biblical Judaism long continued to nourish itself,’ this unknown man has also extracted the best of what was
1 For a somewhat more remote application of this thought cf. J. Bernays, Die heraklitischen Briefe, Berlin, 1869, p. 29. The magic Papyri yield a multitude of examples of the idea.
900 BIBLE STUDIES. [54
best in the Jewish faith, viz., the ethical idea of the God of prophecy, Who separates the pious from the transgressors because He hates evil, and the ‘fear’? of Whom is the beginning of wisdom.
Thus the tablet of Adrumetum is a memorial of the Alexandrian Old Testament. Not only does it reveal what a potent formal influence the Greek Bible, and especially the praise-book thereof, exercised upon the classes who lived outside of the official protection of the Synagogue and the Church, and who thus elude the gaze of history, but it lets us also surmise that the eternal thoughts of the Old Testament had not wholly lost their germinative power even where, long after and in an obscure place, they had seemingly fallen among thorns.

Ni.
NOTES ON SOME BIBLICAL PERSONS AND NAMES. '

Ν τ > ay ys Ψ SEEN \ νον ει ἣν ΝΥ 2 3. ae τὸν ἥλιον αὐτοῦ ἀνατέλλει ἐπὶ πονηροὺς καὶ ἀγαθοὺς καὶ βρέχει ἐπὶ
4 Ν 3Q7 δικαίους Kal ἀδίκους.


NOTES ON SOME BIBLICAL PERSONS AND NAMES.
1. HELIODORUS.
The Second Book of Maccabees has a wonderful story to tell of how King Seleucus IV. Philopator made an un- successful attempt to plunder the temple-treasury in Jeru- salem. A certain Simon, who had occasion to revenge himself upon Onias the high-priest, had gone hurriedly to Apollonius, the Syrian governor of Ccoelesyria and Phoenicia, and had contrived to impress him with the most marvellous ideas of the temple property in Jerusalem. The king, having been informed of the sacred store, thought it well to send his minister Heliodorus to Jerusalem, with orders to bring back the gold with him. MHeliodorus was the very man for such a mission. Having reached Jerusalem, neither the expostulations of the high priest nor the lamentations of the people were able to dissuade him. In the extremity of their distress recourse was had to prayer. And just as the heartless official and his minions were actually preparing to pillage the treasury, “‘there appeared unto them a horse with a terrible rider upon him, and adorned with a very fair covering, and he ran fiercely, and smote at Heliodorus with his fore-feet ; and it seemed that he that sat upon the horse had complete harness of gold. Moreover, two other young men appeared before him, notable in strength, ex- cellent in beauty, and comely in apparel; who stood by him on either side, and scourged him continually, and gave him many sore stripes. And Heliodorus fell suddenly to the ground and was compassed with great darkness; but they that were with him took him up, and put him into a liter and carried him forth.’ A sacrifice offered by the high-
804 BIBLE STUDIES. [172
priest saved the half-dead man, and then the two young men, apparelled as before, appeared to him again, and told him that he owed his life to Onias. Then Heliodorus, being asked by the king after his return, who might be the proper person to send on the same errand to Jerusalem, replied : “Tf thou hast any enemy or adversary to thy government, send him thither, and thou shalt receive him well scourged, if he escape with his life: for in that place without doubt there is an especial power of God ”.
The historical foundations of this tale in 2 Macc. 8, which is certainly better known to-day through Raphael’s picture than through its original narrator, are not so obvious as its plous aim. Grimm!’ is inclined to allow it a kernel of history ; up to verse 23 the story does not contain a single feature which might not have been literally true. Owing to the financial difficulties occasioned by the conclusion of peace with Rome, temple-robbings seem to have become, to some extent, the order of the day with the Seleucidae. Grimm therefore accepts the historicity of the attempt to plunder the temple, but leaves undecided the actual nature of the event, thus ornamented by tradition, by which the project of Heliodorus was baffled. The author is not in a position to decide this question, though, indeed, the answer given by Grimm seems to him to be in the main correct.? But in any case the observation of Schiirer,’ viz., that the book as a whole (or its source, Jason of Cyrene) is not seldom very well-informed in the matter of details, is confirmed in the present passage.
The book undoubtedly says what is correct of the hero of the story, Heliodorus,‘ in describing him as first minister
1 HApAT. iv. (1857), p. 77.
2The author, however, finds, even previous to verse 23, features which are to be explained by the ‘‘ edifying tendency ” of the book.
3 Schiirer, ii., p. 740 (= *iii., p. 360). [Eng. Trans., ii., ii., p. 211 f.]
4 According to the ‘“‘fourth”” Book of Maccabees, which uses this narra- tive for purposes of edification, it was not Heliodorus, but Apollonius, who tried to plunder the Temple. J. Freudenthal, in Die Flav. Joseph. beigelegte Schrift Ueber die Herrsch. der Vernunft, p. 85 f., is inclined to reject both reports as suspicious, but to consider that of 4 Macc. to be the better of the

173] HELIODORUS. 305
of the Syrian king. It is indeed true that this assertion is not vouched for in ancient literature; for Appian, Syr., p. 45 (Mendelssohn, 1., p. 416) makes mention of only one Heliodorus as τινὸς τῶν περὶ THY αὐλήν of Seleucus. But even if this note makes it more than “ probable’’! that it refers to the same man as 15 alluded to in the Second Book of Maccabees, yet, if there were no further proof of the identity, it would be necessary to reckon seriously with the possibility that the author of that book, in accordance with his general purpose, transformed some mere court-official into the first minister of the king of Syria, in order to make still more impressive the miracle of his punishment and his repentance. But this very detail, suspicious in itself, can be corroborated by two Inscriptions from Delos, made known by Th. Homolle, which may be given here :—
I? Ἡλιόδωρον Αἰσχύλου ᾿Αντ[ιοχέα] τὸν σύντροφον ὃ τοῦ βασιλέως ΣἸ]ελεύκου] Φιλοπάτορος καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν πρα[γμάτων)] τεταγμένον οἱ ἐν “αἰ οδικείᾳ ? | τῇ ἐν Φοινίκῃ ἐγδοχεῖς καὶ να[ύκληροι 9] ἐυνοίας ἕνεκεν καὶ φιλοστο[ργίας] [τ]ῆς εἰς τὸν βασιλέα καὶ evepylecias | τῆς εἰς αὑτοὺς ᾿Απόλλωνι. The Inscription stands upon the base of a statue no longer extant: its purport is that some Phoenician ship- masters dedicated the statue of Heliodorus, out of gratitude
two: it ‘‘reports simply and without ornament that which is told in 2 Macc. with distorted exaggeration”. The present writer cannot agree with this opinion; what Freudenthal calls in the one case “simple and without ornament” and in the other ‘‘distorted exaggeration,’ should only, in view of the wholly distinct purposes of the two books, be characterised by the formal antitheses concise and detailed respectively. The hybrid form, Apollo- doros, of which L. Flathe speaks in his Geschichte Macedomens, ii., Leipzig, 1834, p. 601, was in all probability formed from the Apollonius of 4 and the Heliodorus of 2 Macc. (Freudenthal, p. 84).
} Grimm, p. 69. 2 Bulletin de correspondance hellénique, i. (1877), p. 285.
* On this, see p. 310f. below. 20
806 BIBLE STUDIES. [174
for his kindness, and on account of his being well-affected towards the king, to the Delian Apollo.
II.! ἩἩλιόδωρον Αἰσχύλου τὸν σύντροφον βασιλέως] Σελεύκου τεταγμένον δὲ κ[αὶ ἐπὶ τῶν πραγμάτων] καὶ τὴν συγγένειαν αὐτο[Ὁ]. ..... «ον ᾿Αρτεμίδωρος Ἡρακλείδου τῶν... ....... ἀρετῆς ἕνεκεν καὶ δικα[ζιοσύνης ...... ἧς ἔχων] διατελεῖ εἴς τε τὸν βασιλέα κ[αὶ]. ..... φιλίας δὲ καὶ εὐεργεσίας τ[ ἧς εἰς ἑαυτὸν ἀνέθηκεν]
᾿Απόλλωνι ᾿Α[ρτέμιδι Λητοῖ].
This Inscription also is found on the base of a statue; its contents quite resemble those of No. 1; in lines συγγέ- vecav, with some supplementary participle, will signify the same title which is already known to us as συγγενής.3
Homolle’s conjecture that this Heliodorus is identical with the one mentioned in 2 Maccabees, and by Appian, seems to us to be fully established;* note how accu- rately 2 Macc. 37 also introduces him as Ἡλιόδωρον τὸν ἐπὶ τῶν πραγμάτων. This title, which is current elsewhere in the Books of Maccabees (1 Macc. 3”, 2 Macc. 104, 137%, 3 Macc. 71) is proved by other writings to have belonged to Syria,* as also to Pergamus.® In Poly- bius and Josephus it is applied to the viceroy, the representa- tive of the absent king, similarly in 1 Macc. 3”, 2 Macc. 18 *; in 2 Macc. 87 it has the further meaning of chancellor of the kingdom, first minister,® similarly 10", 13°, 3 Macc. 71.
The first Inscription, moreover, confirms the reading πραγμάτων which is given by most MSS. in 2 Mace. 87.
1 Bull. de corr. hell., iii. (1879), p. 364. 2 See p. 159 above.
3 In that case the Inscriptions must certainly have been written before 175 B.c.; for in that year Heliodorus carried out his φιλοστοργία εἰς τὸν βασιλέα, Which is here extolled, in a strange way, υὖξ., by murdering the king.
4 Frankel, Altertiimer von Pergamon, viii. 1, p. 110, cites Polyb. v. 41 and Joseph. Antt. xii. 72.
5 Inscriptions Nos. 172-176 (first half of 2nd cent. B.c.) in Frankel, p. 1081.
6 This interpretation, proposed by Grimm, p. 69, is maintained also by Frankel, p. 110,

175] HELIODORUS. 307
Codices 19, 44, 71, etc., which substitute χρημάτων for πραγμάτων in this passage,' have obviously been so influenced by the contents of the narrative as to turn the chancellor into a chancellor of the exchequer; for such must have been the sense of the title given by them, viz., τὸν ἐπὶ τῶν χρημάτων. As for Syncellus (8th cent. A.D.), Chronogr., p. 5297 (Bonn edition), who likewise describes Heliodorus as ὁ ἐπὶ τῶν χρημάτων, he is probably dependent on these codices.”
Evidence from the Inscriptions has extended our know- ledge thus far: Heliodorus came originally from Antioch,’ and was the son of a certain Aischylos. In the lofty position of first minister of King Seleucus IV. Philopator, to whose familiar circle (σύντροφοι) he had certainly belonged previously, he earned good repute in connection with the shipping trade, and was in consequence the recipient of frequent honours.
The marble statue of Heliodorus was prepared for Phoenician merchants by the ancient sculptors, and the pious gift was dedicated to the Delian Apollo; some narrator of late pre-Christian times, full of faith in the written word, made him the central figure of a richly-coloured picture, and the fate of the temple-robber became a theme for edification, not unmixed with pious horror ; fifteen hundred years after- wards Raphael’s Stanza d’Eliodoro transformed this naive exultation in the penalty paid by the godless man into the lofty though unhistorical idea that the Church of the Vatican is ever triumphant.
2. BARNABAS.4
The writer of the Acts of the Apostles reports, 4 35, that there was given to the Cyprian ᾿Ιω᾿σήφ the surname BapvaBas ἀπὸ τῶν ἀποστόλων, ὅ ἐστιν μεθερμηνευόμενον υἱὸς παρα-
1 This variation is found here only, 2 Against Freudenthal, p. 86, who attributes the alteration to Syncellus
3 T.e., if the restoration in No. I. be correct, as the author holds to be very probable.
4 See p. 187 f. above.
908 BIBLE STUDIES. [176
’
κλήσεως. Now even if it be true that ‘the Apostles’ so named him, yet it is improbable that they were the first to coin the name, which rather appears to be an ancient one. The derivation given by the writer of the early history of Christianity is clear only as regards its first part: βαρ is of course the Aramaic 13, son, so frequently found in Semitic names. In regard to vaBas, however, the second element in the name, it is not evident which Semitic word has been translated παράκλησις in the Apostolic text. The usual conjecture is TI}. But this signifies a prophecy, and is accordingly rendered quite accurately in LXX 2 Ks. [Ezra] 61, Neh. 6”, 2 Chron. 15° by προφητεία, and in 2 Chron. 9” by λόγοι. A. Klostermann! therefore proposes the Aramaic NM}, pacification, consolation; but we doubt whether this τι explain the transcription vaBas. Τί would seem better, even were the etymology given in Acts more intelligible than it is, to leave it out of account as a basis of explanation,? since we are at once assailed by the suspicion that we have here, as in many other passages, a folk-etymology ex post facto. We must rather try to under- stand the name from itself; and, as we believe, two possible explanations of the -vaBas, which is alone in question, le open to us.
In the Greek Bible, Nun, the father of Joshua, 1s called Navn. Whatever be the explanation of this form, whether or not it is actually to be understood, as has been supposed, as a corruption? of ΝΑΥ͂Ν into NATH, does not signify. The only important matter is that, for Navy, there also occur the variants NaBn or Ναβι. Whether this Νανη---
1 Probleme im Aposteltexte neu erdrtert, Gotha, 1883, p. 8 fi.
2 Even Jerome, Liber interpretationis Hebraicorum nomimum, 67 25 1. (Onomastica sacra Pauli de Lagarde studio et sumptibus alterum edita, Gottin- gen, 1887, p. 100), has not straightway adopted the etymology given in Acts; he gives three interpretations: Barnabas filius prophetae wel filius uementis aut (ut plerique putant) filius consolationis.
3 The author fails to understand how Nun should have originally been transcribed Navy. It seems to him more probable that the LXX read M4, or that Navy (or Nan) or Naf: was in actual use as a personal name, and that they substituted it for Nun.
177] BARNABAS. 309
NaBn—Nafi was already in use as ἃ personal name (= prophet) in the time of the LXX cannot be ascertained ; certainly, however, it had later on become known as such to the Jews through the Greek Bible. We might, then, possibly find this name in the -vaBas: BapvaBas would be a Βαρναβη or Bapvafe with a Greek termination—son of a prophet.
But the author thinks it a more promising theory to connect BapvaBas with the recently-discovered Semitic name Βαρνεβοῦς. An Inscription! found in Islahie, the ancient Nicopolis, in Northern Syria, which is assigned, probably on account of the written character, to the 3rd or 4th century A.D., runs as follows :-—
BapveBotv τὸν Kai? ᾿Απολλινάριον Sappava αὐθαίρετον δημιουργὸν Kal γυμνασίαρχον pir{ oe].
The editors explain the name quite correctly as son of Nebo.2 Their conjecture can be further confirmed, par- ticularly by Symmachus, who in Is. 46! renders 22, Nebo, by Νεβοῦς, while the LXX, Aquila and Theodotion tran- scribe it by Ναβώ. BapveBods is one of the many personal names which have Nebo as a constituent part, and, as a theophoric name, will be relatively old. The hypothesis of the affinity, or of the original identity, of BapvaBas and BapveBods is further borne out by the well-known fact that in the transcription of other names compounded with Nebo the H-sound of the word is sometimes replaced by a,° e.9., Nebuchadnezzar = (UXX) Ναβουχοδονοσορ = (Berosus and Josephus) Ναβουχοδονόσορος = (Strabo) Ναβοκοδρόσορος ;
1K. Humann and O. Puchstein, Reisen in Kleinasien und Nordsyrien, Textband, Berlin, 1890, p. 398. A much older Inscription has already been cited, p. 188 above,
2 For this τὸν καί see below, p.]313 f.
3 ῬΑπολλινάριος is (cf. ᾿Απολλώνιος = “Iwvdbas, p. 149 ant2, sub mapemidnuos) an imitation of the theophoric Βαρνεβοῦς ; but one need not on that account have recourse to any such religious-historical equation as Nebo = Apollo, as the editors suggest.
4 Field, ii., p. 522.
5 The A-sound is also found in the Babylonian and Assyrian primary forms, It is not impossible that the name Nam, discussed above, if not coined by the LXX, may be connected in origin with Nebo,
310 BIBLE STUDIES. [178
and Nebuzaradan 2 Kings 255 = (UXX) Ναβουζαρδαν. It is therefore highly probable that the form Βαρναβοῦς might occur instead of BapveBods. The former appears to us to be the original form of the name Βαρναβᾶς." The termination -ods must, in that case, have developed into -as, but this is no extraordinary phenomenon in view of the arbitrariness with which Semitic names were Graecised ; per- haps the Jews intentionally substituted the very common Greek name-ending -as for -οὺς in order to remove from the name its suspiciously pagan appearance: the mutilation of Gentile theophoric names was looked upon by the Jews as an actual religious duty,? on the authority of Deut. 7” and 12°. We indeed see this duty discharged in another personal name formed with Nebo: the name Abed Nego® in the Book of Daniel is most probably an intentional defacement of Abed Nebo, servant of Nebo. Thus did the later Graeco-Jewish Βαρναβᾶς arise from the ancient Semitic BapveBods or BapvaSois. It then became the part of popular etymology to give a religious interpretation to the name thus defaced from motives of piety. The very difficulty of establishing which Semitic word was believed to correspond to -vaBas bears out the hypothesis enunciated above.
3. MANAEN.
In 1 Macc. 1°, according to the common reading, mention is made of παῖδες σύντροφοι ἀπὸ νεότητος οἱ Alex- ander the Great, and, in 2 Macc. 9”, of a certain Philippos as σύντροφος of King Antiochus IV. Epiphanes; similarly, in Acts 131, the esteemed Antiochian Christian Manaén *
1 Τῇ that case this accentuation would commend itself as preferable to the ‘traditional’ BapydBas.—Blass, Granum. des neutest. Griechisch, p. 123, also writes Βαρναβᾶς; on p. 31, BapydBas. [Hng. Trans., pp. 125 and 31.]
2 Winer-Schmiedel, § 5, 27a, note 56 (p. 58). Many similar cases are given there.
3 LXX, ᾿Αβδεναγώ. Note the rendering of the H-sound by a here also.
4His name is Mavahy; that is, of course, OM. The Alexandrinus likewise transcribes Menachem in LXX 2 Kings 15°. by Μαναήν, while the other Codices have Mavahu. The termination -ny gave the foreign name 8
179] MANAEN. 311
is distinguished by the attribute “Ἡρώδου τοῦ τετραάρχου σύντροφος.
In the first passage, however, we have good authority (Alexandrinus, Sinaiticus, etc.) for σὺν ἐκ τροφοι, a word not found elsewhere, ‘‘ but which, precisely on that account, may have been displaced by curtp.” ;! the addition of ἀπὸ νεότητος seems to us to give additional support to the assumption that συνέκτροφοι was the original form.2 Ac- cordingly O. F. Fritzsche, in his edition, has also decided for συνέκτροφοι. The meaning of the word is unquestionably one reared along with another in the proper sense.?
The case is different with the σύντροφος of the other two passages. The commentaries give, in connection with Acts 13', the alternative meanings foster-brother and com- panion in education ;* but the former explanation is forthwith rendered void by the frequent occurrence (to be established presently) of the expression in connection with a king’s name, if we but think what strange inferences would follow from it! We should have to assume, for instance, that in the most diverse localities, and at times most widely apart, the newly-born crown-princes had very frequently to be entrusted to the care of healthy citizens, and, further, that the son of the plebeian nurse was still alive when
kind of Greek look: pet names in eny are occasionally used by the Greeks (A. Fick, Die Griechischen Personennamen nach ihrer Bildung erkldrt, 2nd ed. by F. Bechtel and A. Fick, Géttingen, 1894, p. 28). It will hardly be necessary in this case to assume the arbitrary interchange of w and ν which occurs not infrequently in the transcription of Semitic proper names (cf. on this point, Winer-Schmiedel, § 5, 27 g, and note 63 [p. 61)).
1Grimm, HApAT. iii. (1853), p. 6.
2The word appears to be confirmed also by the Syriac versions, Grimm, ibid., p. 7.
3It cannot be urged against this that the view thus obtained does not correspond with the historical circumstances (i.e. the παῖδες among whom Alexander divided his empire could hardly be all his συνέκτροφοι in the proper sense); but the writer of Macc. certainly held this opinion. The variant σύντροφοι may perhaps be explained by the attempt of some thoughtful copyist to get rid of the historical discrepancy; σύντροφοι in the technical sense presently to be determined was more accurate: the thoughtless thinker of course allowed the amd νεότητος to stand.
4H, Holtzmann, H.C. i.? (1892), p. 371.
312 BIBLE STUDIES. [180, 181
his conlactaneus ascended the throne of his father. The interpretation companion in education is better: one might in this connection compare the play-mates of the Dauphin, who were, as a matter of course, taken from the best families, and of whom, later on, one or another continued, so far as consistent with the reverence that ‘‘ doth hedge a king,” to be the intimate friend of the prince, now come to man’s estate. But this hypothesis is likewise too special; σύντροφος τοῦ βασιλέως is a court title, which is of course to be ex- plained by the fundamental meaning of the word, but in the usage of which this fundamental meaning had disappeared, having given place to the general meaning of intimate friend. The case is on all fours with that of the title of king’s relative.’ σύντροφος τοῦ βασιλέως is established as regards Pergamus by Polybius, xxxu. 2510; further by the Perga- menian Inscriptions, Nos. 1793, 2242, 2486 and 25,2 all of pre-Roman times (before 133 B.c.). ‘‘It appears to have been in general use throughout the Hellenistic kingdoms.” ὃ In regard to Macedonia, Frankel cites Polyb. v. 94; for Pontus, he refers to the Inscription, Bulletin de correspondance hellénique, vii. (1883), p. 855 ; for Egypt, to the observations of Lumbroso.t But the Inscription of Delos (first half of 2nd cent. B.C.) given above,° in which the title is established for Syria also, is the most instructive of all in connection with the passage in Acts; Heliodorus, probably an Antiochian likewise, is there invested with the honorary title σύντροφος τοῦ βασιλέως Σελεύκοῦ Φιλοπάτορος. And in the same way it was allowable to speak of Manaén as the intimate friend of Herod Antipas; nothing further is implied by the technical term, and any inference drawn from it regarding the ante- cedents of the man, or regarding any tender relationship between his mother and the infant Herod, would be very precarious. In the context of the narrative the attribute, when understood in this sense, is of course still more honourable for Manaén and the church at Antioch than would be the case according to the traditional interpretation.
1Cf. p. 159 above, sub συγγενής. 2 Frankel, pp. 111, 129, 164 ff. ° Frankel, p. 111 £. 4 Recherches, p. 207 fi. > P. 305.

181, 182] SAULUS PAULUS. . off
4, SAULUS PAULUS.
In Acts 13° the words Σαῦλος ὁ καὶ Παῦλος are quite abruptly introduced to designate the Apostle who has always hitherto been spoken of as Σαῦλος, and from this place onwards in the book the name Παῦλος is always used. The passage has given rise to the most extraordinary conjectures ; it has even been asserted that the narrator meant the ὁ καὶ Παῦλος to indicate that the change of name had some sort of connection with the conversion of the Proconsul Sergius Paulus described immediately before. It must not be for- gotten, in investigating the point, that it is not said that the Apostle made the change; it is the narrator who does so: by means of the ὁ καί he makes the transition from the previously-used Σ᾽ αῦλος to the Παῦλος to which he hence- forth keeps.
We have never yet seen the fact recorded in con- nection with this passage! that the elliptically-used καί with double names is an exceedingly common usage in N. T. times. W. Schmid,’ in his studies on Atticism (of great importance for the history of the language of the Greek Bible), has recently shown from the Papyri and Inscriptions how widespread this usage was in all quarters ; he names an Inscription of Antiochus Epiphanes as his first authority. “As qui et 1s similarly used in Latin in the case of familiar designations . .. , we might suspect a Latinism, had the
1 Winer-Liinemann, ὃ 18, 1 (p. 102), refers only to quite late writings. On the other hand, the painstaking Wetstein had already in 1752 annotated the passage ‘‘ Inscriptiones’”’! That means more for his time than dozens of other ‘‘ observations’ by the industrious and open-eyed exegetes of last (18th) century.
2 Der Atticismus, iii. (1893), p. 338.—His authorities are to be supple- mented by the Inscription of Mylasa in Caria, Waddington, iii. 2, No. 361 (imperial period), by a multitude of examples from Lycian Inscriptions,—see the lists of the Gerontes of Sidyma in O. Benndorf and G. Niemann, Reisen im Lykien und Karien, Vienna, 1884, p. 73 ff. (time of Commodus)—likewise by many passages from the Egyptian documents in the Royal Museum at Berlin, e.g., Nos. 39; 1412; 200; 2777; 281. In the Pap. Berol. 6815 (BU. ii., p. 48, No. 30) we even find Μάρκου ᾿Αντωνίου Διοσκόρου 6 καὶ Πτολεμαίου, an evidence of the fixedness and formulaic currency of this 6 καί.
914 BIBLE STUDIES. [182, 183
Antiochus Inscription not made it more likely that the Latin usage is really a Graecism.”’ !
W. Schmid seems to think that certain passages from /B®lianus and Achilles Tatius are the earliest instances of this construction in the literature. But even in the literature the usage, most likely derived from the popular speech, can be shown to go much farther back. We find the reading "Ἄλκιμος ὁ καὶ Ιάκιμος in 1 Macc: 7°**, 92 2 Macc. 14%, at least in Codd. 64, 93, 19 (also 62 in the last passage). But even should this reading not be the original, yet we need not be at a loss for literary authorities; a relatively large number are supplied by Josephus.?, The Jewish his- torian, in giving double names, employs not only the fuller forms of expression, such as Σίμων ὁ καὶ δίκαιος ἐπικληθείς (Antt. xii. 24), "ἄλκιμος ὁ καὶ ᾿Ιάκιμος κληθείς (Anti. xii. 97), ᾿Ιωάννην τὸν καὶ Γαδδὶν λεγόμενον (Antt. xi. 12), Διόδοτος ὁ καὶ Τρύφων ἐπικληθείς (Antt. xl. 51), Σελήνη ἡ καὶ Κλεο- πάτρα καλουμένη (Antt. xiil. 164), ᾿Αντίοχος ὁ καὶ Διόνυσος ἐπικληθείς (Bell. Jud. 1. 47), but he often simply connects the two names by ὁ καὶ : ᾿Ιανναῖον τὸν καὶ ᾿Αλέξανδρον (Antt. xiii, 121),) ᾿Ιώσηπος ὁ καὶ Καϊάφας (Antt. xviii. 2.2),) Κλεόδημος ὁ καὶ Μάλχος (Antt.1. 15), "Apxn ἡ καὶ ᾿Εκδείπους (Antt. ν. 1 22), ᾿Ιούδας ὁ καὶ Μακκαβαῖος (Antt. xii. 64), Πακόρῳ τῷ καὶ πρε- σβυτέρῳ (Anti. xx. 33).
When Acts 13° is placed in this philological context, we see that it cannot mean ‘‘ Saul who was henceforth also called Paul”; an ancient reader could only have taken it to mean ‘Saul who was also called Paul’. Had the writer of Acts intended to say that Paul had adopted the Graecised Roman name in honour of the Proconsul, or even that he now adopted it for the first time, he would have selected a different expression. The ὁ καί admits of no other supposi- tion than that he was called Saulos Paulos before he came to
1W. Schmid, Der Atticismus, iii. (1893), p. 838.
2. Guil. Schmidt, De Flav. Ios. EHlocutione, Fleck. Jahrbb. Suppl. xx. (1894), p. 858.
3 For the text see Guil. Schmidt, p. 355.
1 Cf. H. H. Wendt, Meyer, iii. 6/7 (1888), p. 284.

188, 184] SAULUS PAULUS. 315
Cyprus; he had, like many natives of Asia Minor, many Jews and Egyptians of his age, a double name. We know not when he received the non-Semitic name in addition to the Semitic one. It will hardly be demanded that we should specify the particular circumstance which formed the occa- sion of his receiving the surname Paulos. The regulations of Roman Law about the bearing of names cannot in this question be taken into consideration. If in Asia Minor or on the Nile any obscure individual felt that, in adopting a non- barbaric surname, he was simply adapting himself to the times, it is unlikely that the authorities would trouble them- selves about the matter. The choice of such Greco-Roman second names was usually determined by the innocent free- dom of popular taste. But we can sometimes see that such names as were more or less similar in sound to the native name must have been specially preferred.1. In regard to Jewish names this is the case with, eg., ᾿Ιάκιμ---- Ἄλκιμος (Joseph. Antt. xu. 97), Ιησοῦς ὁ λεγόμενος ᾿Ιοῦστος (Col. 4%), ᾿Ιωσὴφ .. . ὃς ἐπεκλήθη ᾿Ιοῦστος (Acts 1*);? of Egyptian names, we have noticed Σαταβοὺς ὁ καὶ Σάτυρος (Pap. Berol. 7080, Col. 2, Fayytim, 2nd cent. a.p.).2 Thus, too, in
1 Winer-Schmiedel, ὃ 16, 9 (p. 143).
2 We must not confuse these cases, in which non-Jewish names of similar sound were attached to the Jewish, with those in which non-Jewish names of similar sound were substituted for the Jewish; those who had adopted new names bore these alone in their intercourse with strangers. Thus the name Ἰάσων, common among Jews, is a substitute for Ἰησοῦς ; the Apostle Symeon (Peter) is usually called Σίμων, not because (as Clavis*, p.
400, still maintains) this word is a transcription of yw, but because it
resembles Συμεών, the actual transcription of the Hebrew name (so, of Peter, Acts 154, 2 Pet. 11). Σίμων is a good Greek name (Fick-Bechtel, p. 251); thus, too, the Vulgate substitutes Cleophas (= Κλεοφᾶς, Fick-Bechtel, p. 20 and foot of p. 164; not to be confounded with Κλεοπᾶς in Luke 24 15, Fick- Bechtel, middle of p. 164) for the (probably) Semitic name KAwma(s? Accent ? [John 19%]; the author does not know what authority Clavis*, p. 244, has
for saying that the Semitic form of KAwza(s?) is ΞΟΠ, still less how P.
Feine, Der Jakobusbrief, Hisenach, 1893, p. 16, can maintain that it is ‘‘ else- where recognised” that KAwmas is Greek, and = KAcomas) ; similarly Σιλουανός seems to be a substitute for the Semitic Σιλας.
3 BU, ix., p. 274, No: 277 2.
316 BIBLE STUDIES. [184, 185
the case of the Tarsian Σ᾽ αοὐὔλ, when he received a non- Semitic second name (we do not know the exact time, but it must have been before Acts 13°) the choice of Παῦλος may have been determined by nothing more than the fact that Παῦλος had a sound somewhat similar to the name made venerable by association with his fellow-tribesman of old.
So far as we know, there has hitherto been no evidence to show that the name Π͵Ἂ.αῦλος was adopted by any other Jew; it is therefore of interest that the recently- published Papyrus fragments relating to the Jewish war of Trajan * several times mention an Alexandrian Jew called Παῦλος, who seems to have been the leader of a deputation which negotiated with the emperor. The question why the narrator calls the Apostle Σαῦλος previous to Acts 13°, and Παῦλος afterwards, has nothing to do with the science of names, or with the history of Paul; it is altogether a question of literary history. The most satisfactory solution
1The frequently-noted circumstance that in the accounts of Paul’s conversion, Acts 94:17, 227-15, 261}, he is addressed by Jesus and Ananias as Σαούλ may be explained by the historian’s sense of liturgical rhythm ;—com- pare the way in which he puts the name Συμεών (for Peter, whom he else- where calls Σίμων and Πέτρος) in the mouth of James in a solemn speech, 154, Similarly, the early Christians did not Graecise, e.g., the venerable name of the patriarch Jacob: Ἰακώβ had a ‘‘ biblical,’ Ἰάκωβος a modern, sound. In the same way Paul appears to have made a distinction between the ancient theocratic form Ἱερουσαλήμ and the modern political name Ἵερο- σόλυμα: when he uses the former, there is ever a solemn emphasis upon the word, especially noticeable in Gal. 4 39.325 (cf. Hebr. 12”, Rev. 31%, 21% 1%); but also as the dwelling-place of the saints, Jerusalem is more to him than a mere geographical term: hence in 1 Cor. 16°, Rom. 15” f., he lovingly and reverently marks a distinction by writing Ἱερουσαλήμ; lastly, in Rom. 15% this form again best suits the subject, viz., an enthusiastic retrospect of the diffusion of the gospel. We must also bear in mind that the Gospels preserve many of our Lord’s sayings in Aramaic; see p. 76 above. The assertion of A. Buttmann, Gramm. des neutest. Sprachgebr., p. 6, that, when Paul is addressed, the “‘ popular” (??—for the readers of the Greek Book of Acts ?) form Σαούλ is regularly employed, is contradicted by Acts 26%, 27%.
2 Cf. Acts 18 31, and also Rom. 11! and Phil. 3°. 3 See p. 68 above.
4The name, indeed, is mutilated in almost all the passages, so that the restoration Σαῦλος would also be possible, but in Col. vii. of the edition of Wilcken, Hermes, xxvii. (1892), p. 470, Παῦλος can be distinctly made out.

185, 186] SAULUS PAULUS. 317
so far (unless we are willing to go back to a difference in the sources) is the supposition! that the historian uses the one or the other name according to the field of his hero’s labours; from chap. 131 the Jewish disciple Σ᾽ αῦλος is an apostle to the whole world: it is high time, then, that he should be presented to the Greeks under a name about which there was nothing barbaric, and which, even before this, was really his own.
Σαῦλος ὁ καὶ Παῦλος: only as such perhaps did many of his brethren of the same race understand him; from his own confessions we know that he was rather a Παῦλος ὁ καὶ Σαῦλος--ἃ man who laboured for the future and for humanity, though as a son of Benjamin and a contemporary of the Cesars. Christians in later times would often have fain called him Saul only; but on this account it is the name Paul alone which in history is graven above the narrow gate at which Augustine and Luther entered in?
1 The following phenomenon is perhaps instructive on this point. In several passages of Acts mention is made of a Ιωάννης ὁ ἐπικαλούμενος Μάρκος, either by this double name or by his Jewish name Ἰωάννης ; in 13) it is particularly evident that Ἰωάννης has been used purposely: the man had forsaken the Apostle Paul and had returned to Jerusalem. Quite differently in 1539. he now goes with Barnabas to Cyprus, and this is the only passage in Acts where the Greek name Μάρκος, standing alone, is applied to him. This may, of course, be purely accidental.
2 With this should be compared Professor W. M. Ramsay’s brilliant
section on the same subject, St. Paul the Traveller and the Roman Citiizen?, London, 1896, pp. 81-88.—Tr.


Wak: GREEK TRANSCRIPTIONS OF THE TETRAGRAMMATON.
καὶ φοβηθήσονται τὰ ἔθνη τὸ ὄνομά σου κύριε.

GREEK TRANSCRIPTIONS OF THE TETRA- GRAMMATON.
In a notice of Professor W. Dindorf’s edition of Clement, Professor P. de Lagarde’ reproaches the editor, in reference to the passage Strom. v. 63 (Dindorf, i. p. 2725), with having ‘‘no idea whatever of the deep significance of his author’s words, or of the great attention which he must pay to them in this very passage’. Dindorf reads there the form ᾿Ιαού as τὸ τετράγραμμον ὄνομα TO μυστικόν. But in various manuscripts and in the Turin Catena to the Pentateuch? we find the variants "Ia οὐαί or “Ia ové.* Tagarde holds that the latter reading ‘“‘might have been unhesitatingly set in the text ; in theological books nowadays nothing is a matter of course’. The reading *Iaové certainly appears to be the original; the e was subsequently left out because, naturally enough, the name designated as the Tetragrammaton must have no more than four letters.‘
The form ’Iaové is one of the most important Greek transcriptions of the Tetragrammaton usually referred to in seeking to ascertain the original pronunciation. Β΄. Dietrich in a letter of February, 1866,° to Franz Delitzsch, makes the following collection of these transcriptions :—
1 GGA. 1870, part 21, p. 801 ff. Cf. Symmikta, i., Gottingen, 1877, p. 14 f.
2 Cf. upon this H. W. Hengstenberg, Die Authentie des Pentateuchs, i., Berlin, 1836, p. 226 f.
’ With reference to the itacistic variation of the termination, cf. the quite similar variants of the termination of the transcription Εἰμαλκουαί 1 Mace. 11°. Ἰμαλκουέ, Σινμαλκουή, etc., and on these C. L. W. Grimm, HApAT. iii., Leipzig, 1853, p. 177.
4 Hengstenberg, p. 227.
5 ZAW. iii. (1883), p. 298.
21





BIBLE STUDIES. [4,5
my. m7 ὯΝ Cent. 2. Irenaeus -- Ιαοθ (2): = ,, 2-38. Clement (Iaove) ” Ιαου =
» 9. Origen = law (law Ia) Ia—IAH »» 4. Jerome --- Jaho = » — Epiphanius laBe -- Ια
» ὅ. Theodoret laBe law Aia (cod. Aug.
(Sam.) Ia)
» ¥. Isidore a -- Ja. Ja

It is an important fact that nearly all the transcriptions which have thus come down from the Christian Fathers are likewise substantiated by ‘‘ heathen’ sources. In the recently-discovered Egyptian Magic Papyri there is a whole series of passages which—even if in part they are not to be conceived of as transcriptions of the Tetragrammaton—merit our attention in this connection. As early as 1876 W. W. Graf Baudissin,® in his investigation of the form ‘Ido, had referred to passages relating to it in the Magic Papyri in Leiden’ and Berlin.’ Since that time the edition of the Leiden Papyri by C. Leemans,® and that of the Paris and London Papyri by C. Wessely,’ the new edition of the Leiden Papyri by A. Dieterich,* the latest publications of the British
1 Wrongly questioned by Εἰ. Dietrich; cf. p. 327 below.
2 F. Dietrich reads Iaov.
3 Studien zur semitischen Religionsgeschichte, Heft i., Leipzig, 1876, Da) ΤΟΥ ἢ
4 At that time there were only the preliminary notes of C. J. C. Reuvens: Lettres ἃ M. Letronne sur les papyrus bilingues et grecs . . . du musée dan- tiquités de Vuniversité de Leide, Leiden, 1830.
5 Kdited by G. Parthey, AAB., 1865, philol. und histor. Abhh., 109 fi.
6In his publication, Papyri Graeci muset antiquarti publicd Lugdunt- Batavi, vol. ii., Leiden, 1885.
7 DAW. philos.-histor. Classe, xxxvi. (1888), 2 Abt. p. 27 ff. and xlii. (1893), 2 Abt. p. 1 ff.
® Papyrus magica musei Lugdunensis Batavi, Fleckeisen’s Jahrb. Suppl. xvi. (1888), p. 749 ff. (=the edition of Papyrus J 384 of Leiden). Dieterich, Abraxas, Studien zur Religions-Geschichte des spiéteren Altertums, Leipzig, 1891, p. 167 ff. (= edition of Papyrus J 395 of Leiden), The author has to thank his colleague and friend the editor (now in Giessen) for divers information and stimulating opposition.
ie
5, 6] THE TETRAGRAMMATON. 323
Museum,! and other works, have rendered still more possible the knowledge of this strange literature, and an investiga- tion of these would be worth the trouble, both for the historian of Christianity * and for the Semitic philologist.*
The Papyri in their extant form were written about the end of the third and beginning of the fourth century a.p. ; their composition may be dated some hundred years before —in the time of Tertullian.* But there would be no risk of error in supposing that many elements in this literature be- long to a still earlier period. It is even probable, in view of the obstinate persistence of the forms of popular belief and superstition, that, e.g., the books of the Jewish exorcists at Ephesus, which, according to Acts 19°, were committed to the flames in consequence of the appearance of the Apostle Paul, had essentially the same contents as the Magic Papyri from Egypt which we now possess.”
In the formule of incantation and adjuration found in this literature an important part is played by the Divine names. very possible and impossible designation of deities,
1F. G. Kenyon, Greek Papyri im the British Museum, London, 1893, p. 62 ff.
2 Cf. A. Jilicher, 7AG. xiv. (1893), p. 149.
3 Cf. EH. Schiirer, Geschichte des jiidischen Volkes im Zeitalter Jesu Christi, 8.5, Leipzig (1898), p. 294 ff., and especially L. Blau, Das altjiidische Zauberwesen (Jahresbericht der Landes-Rabbinerschule in Budapest, 1897-98), Budapest, 1898.
4 Wessely, i., p. 36 ff. Though A. Harnack, Geschichte der altchrist- lichen Litteratur bis Husebvus, i., Leipzig, 1893, p. ix., maintains that the age of the Magic Literature is as yet quite undetermined, this must so far be limited as that at least a termuvus ad quem can be established on paleo- graphical and internal grounds for a not inconsiderable part of this literature.
5 The Book of Acts—if we may insert this observation here—manifests in this passage an acquaintance with the terminology of magic. Thus the expression τὰ περίεργα, used in 19 1", is a terminus technicus for magic ; cf., in addition to the examples given by Wetstein, ad loc., Pap. Lugd., J 384, xii. 19 and 21, περιεργία and περιεργάζομαι (Fleck. Jalrbb. Suppl. xvi., p. 816: cf. Leemans, ii., p. 73). So also πρᾶξις, 19 15, a terminus technicus for a particular spell, of which the indexes of Parthey, Wessely and Kenyon afford numerous examples. The ordinary translation artifice (Rinke) obliterates the peculiar meaning of the word in this connection. [English A.V. and R.V. deeds even more completely].
924 BIBLE STUDIES. (6, 7
Greek, Egyptian and Semitic, is found in profuse variety, just as, in general, this whole class of literature is character- ised by a peculiar syncretism of Greek, Egyptian and Semitic ideas.
But what interests us at present are the forms which can in any way be considered to be transcriptions of the Tetragrammaton. For the forms which are handed down by the Fathers, in part still questioned, are all verified by the Papyri, with the sole possible exception of Clement’s Iaove.
Tao.
To the examples given by Baudissin there is to be added such a large number from the Papyri since deciphered, that a detailed enumeration 15 unnecessary.! The palindromic form tama.” is also frequently found, and, still more frequently, forms that seem to the author to be combinations of it, such as αρβαθιαω. The divine name Jaw became so familar that it even underwent declension: εἰμὶ θεὸς θεῶν ἁπάντων tawy σαβαωθ adwvat al Spaklas (Pap. Lugd. J 384, 11. 1).
Ta.
Likewise not infrequent. Without claiming exhaustive- ness we cite the following :— ὁ ἐπὶ τῆς ἀνάγκης τεταγμένος ιακουβ ta taw σαβαωθ adwvat [αἸβρασαξἕξ (Pap. Lond. ΟΧΧΙ. 648, 649),4 with which com- pare the gem-inscription ta ta taw adwvar σαβαωθ," the
combinations wand (Pap. Lond. xlvi. 56,6 Pap. Paris. Bibl. nat.
1 Cf. the indexes of Leemans, Wessely and Kenyon.
2 Tn the form ιαοαι in Pap. Par. Bibl. nat. 996 (Wessely, i., p. 69). Itis to be regretted that the editor does not give the library number of this Papyrus.
3 Fleck. Jahrbb. Suppl. xvi., p. 798; Leemans, ii., p. 15. K. Buresch, ATIOAAQN KAAPIOS, Untersuchungen zum Orakelwesen des spdteren Altertwms, Leipzig, 1889, p. 52, unnecessarily brackets the ν of ιαων.
4 Kenyon, p. 105; Wessely, ii., p.44. We do not give Wessely’s number- ing of the lines, which is different from Kenyon’s. In line 327 of the same Papyrus we are not quite certain whether ia is meant for a Divine name or not.
5 Ὁ. Β΄. Kopp, Palaeographia critica, iv., Mannheim, 1829, p. 226.
6 Kenyon, p. 67; Wessely, i., p. 128.

7. 8] THE TETRAGRAMMATON. 325
961 and 3033'), and vawr (Pap. Paris. Lowvre 2391 151),? as also a whole mass of other combinations.
Tamia :?
(read) ἐπὶ tod μετώπου iawia (Pap. Paris. Bibl. nat. 3257).4
Ian
occurs more frequently; in particular, in the significant passage :—
ὁρκίζω σε κατὰ Tov θεοῦ τῶν ᾿Εβραίων ᾿Ιησοῦ" ιαβα" tan’ αβραωθ’ aia’ θωθ' ede ἐλω αηω" cov’ μιβαεχ᾽ αβαρμας" ἴαβα paov' αβελβελ' Nova’ aBpa’ μαροια᾿ βρακιων (Pap. Paris. Bibl. nat. 3019 α. ;° again, in the same Papyrus, 1222 8° κύριε LAW ALN LWN WLN WLN LN ALWAL ALOVMW ANW NAL LEW HUW ANnLAW awa aen. vw aev can εἰ. One might surmise that the form van in the latter passage should be assigned to the other mean- ingless permutations of the vowels.’ But against this is to be set the fact that the form is authenticated as a Divine name by Origen, that in this passage it stands at the end of the series (the εἰ of the Papyrus should likely be accented εἶ), and thus seems to correspond to the well-known form caw at the beginning. Nevertheless, too great stress should not be laid upon the occurrence, in similar vowel-series, of purely vocalic transcriptions of the Tetragrammaton.
Further, in the same Papyrus, 156° and 19s6°; also in Pap. Lond. xlvi. 23.!°
1 Wessely, i., pp. 68 and 121. 2 Thid., p. 144.
5 Combined from law and Ia (cf. Baudissin, p. 183 f., and F. Dietrich, p. 294).
4 Wessely, i., 126.
5 Ibid., p. 120. This passage, so far as regards the history of religion, is one of the most interesting: Jesus is named as the God of the Hebrews ; observe the Divine names combined with a8 (in reference to αβελβελ, Cf. Baudissin, p. 25, the name of the King of Berytus ᾿ΑβέλβαλοΞ) ; on aia and iaBa see below, pp. 326 and 333 f.; with reference to θωθ (Egyptian deity) in the Papyri, cf. A. Dieterich, Abraxas, p. 70.
8 Tbid., p. 75. 7 Cf. upon these, p. 329 below.
8 Wessely, i., p. 84. 9 Tbid., p. 94.
10 Kenyon, p. 66; Wessely, i., p. 127.
926 BIBLE STUDIES. [8, 9
This form is also found in W. Frohner’s' issue of the bronze tablet in the Museum at Avignon : the last two lines should not be read καὶ σὺ συνέργει ᾿Αβρασάξ wry ᾿Ιαώ, as Frohner reads them, but καὶ σὺ συνέργει αβρασαξ van” caw. The reverse combination caw .an is found in a leaden tablet from Carthage, CID. viii. Suppl. i., No. 12509.
We may, finally, at least refer to the passage ὅτι δισύλ- AaBos εἶ an (Pap. Paris. Bibl. nat. 944).3 According to A. Dieterich,! an is “‘ simply a mystical Divine name,” and “‘ it is possible that it should be read aw”. We consider this alteration quite unnecessary. Either a7 is an indistinct reminiscence of our van, or else we must definitely conclude that the « of san coming after εἰ has fallen out by hemi- eraphy.°
Aia.
Theodoret’s form Aia, for which the Augsburg Codex and the ed. princ. of Picus read Ia,° is found not only in the above-cited passage, Pap. Par. Bibl. nat. 3019 πι, but also in Pap. Lugd. J 395, xvii.s,’ as—a fact of special interest— the correction of the a:pa which originally stood in the MS.
Jaoth.
The Latin codices of Ireneus yield the form Jaoth.® Ireneus distinguishes one pronunciation with a long, and another with a short, o (ii. 353, Massuet: Jawth, extensa cum aspiratione novissima syllaba, menswram praefinitam mani- festat ; cum autem per o graecam corripitur ut puta Jaoth, eum — qui dat fugam malorum significat).
1 Philologus, Suppl. v. (1889), p. 44 f.
2 That is, A instead of A; tacitly corrected by Wessely, Wiener Studien, viii. (1886), p. 182.
3 Wessely, i., p. 68. 4 Abraxas, p. 97.
5 The . of way must, in that case, on account of the metre and the δισύλλαβος, be pronounced as a consonant (cf. on this point, Kiihner-Blass, Ausfiihrliche Grammatik der griechischen Sprache, i. 1, Hanover, 1890, p. 50).
6 Hengstenberg, p. 227; F. Dietrich, p. 287. 7 A. Dieterich, Abr., p. 196; Leemans, ii., p. 141. ® Cf., in particular, Baudissin, p. 194 f.
9, 10] THE TETRAGRAMMATON. 327
F. Dietrich has erroneously questioned this form.! The following should be added to the citations given by Bau- dissin :—
Pap. Lond. xlvi. 142 (vawT),” as, 5,  Xlvi. 479 (tawd),° Pap. Par. Bibl. nat. 3268 (vaw8),* Pap. Lugd. J 395, xxi.14 (aBpatiaw8),® Pap. Lond. xlvi. 56 (αρβαθεαω θ)," Pap. Berol. 2125 (auBptOtaw6)."
With reference to the agglutination of a T-sound to taw, cf. the literature cited by Baudissin.* The Papyri yield a large number of examples of similar forms in -#@. Similar forms with Greek terminations (e.g., Φαραώθης), in Josephus and others.°
Taove.
Regarding Clement’s form Iaove, the author calls atten- tion to the following passages :—
θεὸς θεῶν, ὁ κύριος τῶν πνευμάτων Oo ἀπλάνητος αἰὼν Lawounl, εἰσάκουσόν μου τῆς φωνῆς - ἐπικαλοῦμαί σε τὸν δυνάστην τῶν θεῶν, ὑψιβρεμέτα Ζεῦ, Ζεῦ τύραννε, αδαιναι “ἷ κύριε LAWOUNE* ἐγώ εἰμι ὁ ἐπικαλούμενός σε συριστὶ θεὸν μέγαν ζααλαηριφφου καὶ σὺ μὴ παρακούσῃς τῆς φωνῆς ἑβραϊστὶ αβλαναθαναλβα αβρασίλωα " ἐγὼ γάρ εἰμι σίλθαχωουχ λαίλαμ βαασαλωθ taw tew νεβουθ σαβιοθαρβωθ apBabiaw ιαωθ σα- Baw@ πατουρὴ ζαγουρὴ βαρουχ αδωναι εἐλωαι ιαβρααμ βαρ-
βαραυω ναυσιφ ὑψηλόφρονε. . . (Pap. Lond. xlvi. 466-482).}} 1p, 294. 2 Kenyon, p. 69; Wessely, i., p. 130. 3 Kenyon, p. 80; Wessely, i., p. 139. 4 Wessely, i., p. 126. > A. Dieterich, Abr., p. 201. 6 Kenyon, p. 67; Wessely, i., p. 128.
7 Parthey, p. 154. We begin the word with a, and affix the @ to the previous word ; cf. Kenyon, p. 111, line 849, αμβριθηρα.
ΒΒ 105:
9" Cf., for example, the Φαρεθώθης of Artapanus (Eusebius, Praep. ev. ix. 18), and, upon this, J. Freudenthal, Hellenistische Studien, Heft 1 and 2, Breslau, 1875, p. 169.
10 With this expression, also common in the Book of Enoch, compare LXX Num. 16”, 27 16,
11 Kenyon, p. 80; Wessely, i., 139. We have given the passage 1m extenso because it is particularly instructive in respect to the Syncretism of this literature.
928 BIBLE STUDIES. (10, 11
ἀκουσάτω μοι" πᾶσα γλῶσσα καὶ πᾶσα φωνή, ὅτι ἐγώ εἰμι TepTaw [uny Yay] μνηχ σακμηφ LAWOVEN WNW WNW LEoOVwWNL nuana [corrupt] enwvoe! ... (Pap. Lugd. J 384, vi. 12-14).?
σὺ εἶ ὁ ἀγαθοδαίμων ὁ γεννῶν ἀγαθὰ καὶ τροφῶν τὴν οἰκουμένην, σοῦ δὲ τὸ ἀένναον κομαστήριον, ἐν ᾧ καθίδρυταί σου τὸ ἑπταγράμματον ὄνομα πρὸς τὴν ἁρμονίαν τῶν ζ΄ φθόγ- γῶν ἐχόντων φωνὰς πρὸς τὰ κη΄ φῶτα τῆς σελήνης, σαραφαρα apap ata βρααρμαραφα αβρααχ περταωμὴχ akuny Lawoven tawove εἰου anw enov aw... . (Pap. Lugd. J 395, xvii. 25-32).3
OTL προσείλημμαι THY δύναμιν τοῦ ᾿Αβραὰμ ᾿Ισὰκ καὶ τοῦ ᾿Ιακὼβ καὶ τοῦ μεγάλου θεοῦ δαίμονος tam αβλαναθαναλβα σιαβραθίλαω λαμψτηρ int ww. θεέ, ποίησον, κύριε, περταωμὴχ χαχ μὴχ ιαωουὴε LawouneE Leovanw enoviaw (Pap. Lugd., J 395, XVII1., 21-26).4
It might appear at first sight very natural to assume that these forms are related to Clement’s Iaove. In considera- tion of the great freedom with which the Hebrew vowels were transcribed in Greek, it need not seem strange that the H-sound at the end of words is rendered by mz, ne and en in the Papyri; in point of fact the strengthening or length- ening of the e by the addition of ἡ would give a more distinct rendering of the ΓΙ. than the bare ε of Clement. The coming of w before ov is the only strange feature. Still, even this peculiarity might be explained by the preference for Iaw, the most popular transcription, which it was desired should have a place also here.
For these reasons Kenyon maintains that the form Iawovne is actually the Divine name, and, indeed, that it is an expansion of the form Iaw.°
Notwithstanding, we must not trust entirely to plausi-
1 Considered by A. Dieterich to be a palindrome of the τεονωηι.
2 A. Dieterich, Fleck. Jahrbb. Suppl. xvi., p. 804; Leemans, ii., p. 23. 3 A. Dieterich, Abr., p. 195 f.; Leemans, ii., p. 141 f.
4 A. Dieterich, Abr., p. 197; Leemans, ii., p. 145.
5 P. 63: “The exact pronunciation of that name . . was preserved a profound secret, but several approximations were made to it; among which the commonest is the word Iaw . ., which was sometimes expanded, so as to employ all the vowels, into Iawoune”’.
11, 19] THE TETRAGRAMMATON. 329
bility. We must first of all investigate whether the said forms do not belong to the manifold permutations of the seven vowels,’ which are all but universally considered to be capricious and meaningless, mocking every possible attempt at explanation, and which can therefore, now less than ever, yield a basis for etymological conjectures.
An instructive collection of these permutations and com- binations of the seven vowels for magical purposes is found in Wessely’s treatise, Hphesia Grammata.? That writer else- where® passes judgment upon them as follows: ‘“ other [names] again appear to have no special meaning, for, just as magical formule are formed from the seven vowels aenuovw and their permutations and combinations . . ., so in all probability there were magic formule formed from the consonants also, now Hebraising, now Egyptianising, now Grecising, and without any definite meaning”. We are unable to decide whether this assertion concerning the consonantal formule is correct. But certainly when the chaos of the vocalic formations is surveyed, the possibility of accounting for the great majority of the cases may be doubted.* If, then, it were established that the forms cited above should also be assigned to this class, they could, of course, no longer be mentioned in the present discussion. We should otherwise repeat the mistake of old J. M. Gesner,* who believed that he had discovered the Divine name Jehovah in the vowel series IEHQOTA.
But in the present instance the matter is somewhat different, and the conjecture of Kenyon cannot be sum- marily rejected. To begin with, the form sawoune or tawovnt,
1 Cf. on this point Baudissin, p. 245 fi.; Parthey, p.116f.; A. Dieterich, Ἀγ... Ρ. 291.
2 The 12th Jahresb. iiber das K. K. Franz-Josephs-Gymn. in Wren, 1886.
3 Wiener Studien, viii. (1886), p. 183.
‘Let one example suffice: Pap. Lugd. J 395, xx.ift, (A. Dieterich, Abr., p. 200; Leemans, i., p. 149 f.): ἐπικαλοῦμαί σε wevo waeniaw aenarenan LOVWEU ιεουαηωηι WHLLAN ιωουηαυὴ VINA ιωιωαι ιωαι WH EE OV ιωι aw τὸ μέγα ὄνομα.
> De laude dei per septem vocales in the Commentationes Soc. Reg. δοϊοννέ, Gotting., i. (1751), p. 245 fi.
990 BIBLE STUDIES. [12, 13
in the first passage quoted, does not stand among other vowel-series ; on the contrary, it 15 enclosed on both sides by a number of indubitable Divine names. Further, the same form with insignificant modifications is found in various passages of various Papyri; from this we may conclude that it is at least no merely hap-hazard, accidental form. Finally, its similarity with Clement’s Iaove is to be noted.
At the same time, wider conclusions should not be drawn from these forms—none, in particular, as to the true pro- nunciation of the Tetragrammaton: for the fact that in three of the quoted passages the form in question is followed by vocalic combinations in part meaningless, constitutes an objection that is at all events possible.
The value of the vocalic transcriptions of the Tetragrammaton for the determination of its true pronunciation appears to us, by reason of the diffuse and capricious usage of the vowels which we find throughout the Magic Interature, to be at most very small. The very great uncertainty of the traditional texts must also be urged as an objection to its being so employed. Nowhere could copyists’ errors! be more easily made, nowhere are errors in reading by editors more possible, than in these texts. Let any one but attempt to copy half a page of such magic formule for himself: the eye will be continually losing its way because there is no fixed point amidst the confusion of meaningless vowels by which it can right itself.
TaBe.
It is thus all the more valuable a fact that the important consonantal transcription of the Tetragram, Jae, given by Epiphanius and Theodoret, is attested likewise by the Magic Literature, both directly and indirectly. The author has found it four times in the collocation saBe ἕεβυθ :—
ἐξορκίζω ὑμᾶς TO ἅγιον ὄνομ[ α ἐερηκισθαρηαραραραχαραραηφθισ.. ...
1 Cf. Wessely, ii., p. 42, on the ‘frivolity ” (Leichtfertigkeit) with which the copyists treated the magic formule. The state of the text generally with regard to Semitic names in Greek manuscripts, biblical and extra-biblical, is instructive.
13, 14] THE TETRAGRAMMATON. 331
taw taBe Se BvO@ rNavaBicadrav........ εκτυπαμμουποφδηντιναξο ὁ τῶν ὅλων βασιλεὺς εξεγέρθητι
(leaden tablet of cent. 2 or 3 from a Cumean tomb, C/G. 111., No. 5858 5). J. Franz! has correctly explained this form: habes in ea formula IAQ Judaicum satis notum illud ex monumentis Abraxeis, deinde IABE, quo nomine Samaritanos summum numen invocasse refert Theodoretus Quaest. in Hxod. xv. On ζεβυθ see below. Wessely? conjectures that law SABAwG appears in the third line. But f8v@ is vouched for by the two following passages which give the same magic precept as a precept, which is actually put in practice in the Cumean tablet :—
On a tablet of tin shall be written before sunrise among other words the λόγος εἰ... σιφθη taBe ζεβυθ (Pap. Lond. CXX1. 419),°
On a chalice one shall write besides other words epy- κισιθφη λόγον taBe ζεβυθ (Pap. Par. Bibl. nat. 2000),*
Similarly ἐπικαλοῦμαί σου... τῷ μεγώλῳ σου ὀνόματι
. ερηκισιθφη αραραχαρ apa ηφθισικηρε ιαβε ζεβυθ ἴωβυθιε (Pap. Par. Bibl. nat. 1734 α.).ὃ
How are we to explain the form f«8v@° which thus occurs four times in union with vaBe? F. Lenormant’ main- tains that it is the names Beelzebuth and Jao which are found on the tablet. He reads law ia βεζεβὺθ OravaBi σαφλαν... “ὃ Leaving aside the fact that the form Beelzebuth can be no-
* CURE τ} {os 151}- 2 Wiener Studien, viii. (1886), p. 182. * Kenyon, p. 98; Wessely, ii., p. 34. 4 Wessely, i., p. 95. 5 Ibid., p. 89. This passage renders it possible to restore the text of
the Inscription CJG. iii., No. 5858 ὁ, and of the quotation from Pap. Lond. exxi. 419, with certainty ; observe the palindrome ερηκισιθφη apapax, etc.
δ Cf. also κύριε apxavdapa φωταζα mupipwra ζαβυθ. . . (Pap. Par. Bibl. nat. 631-632; Wessely, i., p. 60).
7 De tabulis devotionis plumbeis Alexandrinis, Rhein. Mus. fiir Philo- logie, N. F., ix. (1854), p. 375.
8 Ibid., p. 374.
332 BIBLE STUDIES. [14, 15
where authenticated,! it is very precarious to see it in the βεζεβυθ of the Inscription. The mere absence of the X, indeed, would not be decisive 2 against Lenormant’s idea, but certainly the v, which cannot be read as τ," is decisive, and above all the great improbability of the assumption that the names of God and the Devil stand thus closely together. We consider it to be much less objectionable to explain ‘ ζεβυθ as a corruption of NINA, and to see in wae ζεβυθ
the familiar NINE mm.
With reference to this identification, the author’s col- league, Herr P. Behnke, Pastor and Repetent at Marburg, has kindly given him the following additional information : °
“v = Heb. ὃ is frequently found. The examples, how- ever, in which this vowel-correspondence appears before p should not be taken into account (WO = μύῤῥα, WZ = Τύρος, MAM = ᾿Ιταβύριον, ᾿Αταϑύριον, wid = Κῦρος, "33 = κινύρα. Tn τ, wis, ian [92] the 5 is a lengthened ἅ, and the ordinary transcription ‘of Sem..% is v.: But a diferente
‘The French scholar’s assertion is only to be explained by the fact that the form of Satan’s name is, in French, Belzébuth or Belsébuth. We have not been able to ascertain when this form can be first vouched for, or how it is to be explained. Should we find in the variant belzebud of (Vulgate) Codex mm, Matt. 10 35 (Tischendorf), authority for saying that the T-sound has supplanted the original ending ὁ or / in later Latin, and so in French also? What form is found in the ‘‘ Romance ” Bibles ?
ἢ Cod. B., occasionally also δῷ» of the N. T. yield the form βεεξεβουλ; cf. on this Winer-Schmiedel, ἃ 5, 31 (p. 65).
> Viva-voce information by W. Schulze. Cf. Winer-Schmiedel, § 5, 21 ὁ (p. 51), on κολλούριον.
* Cf. Franz, p. 757. Franz, in his explanation of the syllable βυθ, recalls the βυθός of the Valentinians. It is more correct to point to the frequently occurring (Egyptian ?) termination in -v@—the 8 is got from (cBawd. Cf. the name of deities and months θωυθ, the formations βιενυθ (Kopp, iv., p. 158), wevyv@v0 taw (Pap. Lond. οχχὶ. 80; Kenyon, p. 110; Wessely, ii., p. 49), ἴωβυθιε (Pap. Par. Bibl. nat. 1799; Wessely, i., p. 89). Cf. on Egyptian female names in -υθ, A. Boeckh, AAB., hist.-phil. Klasse, 1820-1821, p. 19.
> Cf. also H. Lewy, Die semitischen Fremdwirter im Griechischem Berlin, 1895, pp. 38, 42 f., 225.
15, 16] THE TETRAGRAMMATON. 333
appears in 935, which goes back to an original kanndr ; here therefore the v corresponds to an 6 which has been derived from ὦ, as would be the case with -υθ = N\-). But it seems to me to be of greater consequence that the Pheenician pro- nunciation of Heb. 6 (and 6) is y. Thus we have in the Poenulus of Plautus (ed. Ritschl) [chyl = by = kull], Seale) (= maiisdi) given as mysehi; DS (sign, original form ath) as yth, DN as syth. Moreover, Movers (Phéniz., ii, 1, p. 110) has identified Berytos with ΓΛ ΝΞ, and Lagarde (Mitteil., i., p. 226) has acknowledged the identification. It is thus quite possible that MINTY could have become ζεβυθ in the mouth of a Phoenician juggler. Still, the omission of the ἃ before oth in the pronunciation remains a difficulty.”’
Perhaps IaSe is also contained in the word cepiaBe- Bow (Pap. Lond. xlvi.s)!; but the text is uncertain and the composition of the word doubtful.
Reference must finally be made to a number of forms, in respect of which the author is again unable to allow him- self a certain conclusion, but which appear to him to be corruptions of the form taPe, and therefore in any case to merit our attention :—
taBoe, Pap. Lond. xlvi. 63 ;?
taBa® is frequently found: ὁρκίζω σε κατὰ Tod θεοῦ τῶν
‘“EBpaiwy Ἰησοῦ taBa* tan........ αβαρμας" taBa paov. aBerPer... (Pap. Par. Bibl. nat. 3019 α.),} ἐπικαλοῦμαί σε Tov péeyav εὐ ovpavwm........ βαθαβαθι tatpwv’ ade’ taBa
GaBaw0® σαβαωθ᾽ adwvar ὁ θεὸς ὁ μέγας ορσενοφρη (Pap. Par.
1 Kenyon, p. 65; Wessely, i., p. 127.
2 Kenyon, p. 67; Wessely, p. 128.
2 F. Dietrich, p. 282: ‘The principal thing is, however, that the pro- nunciation Jahavd has no historic authority whatever. If Theodoret had intended to signify that, while ΓΤ ΓΤ was pronounced Ἰαβέ by the Samari- tans, the Jews pronounced this full form of the name with ὦ at the end, then he would have written Ἰουδαῖοι δὲ Ἰαβά, which is warranted by none of the variants.” But ‘historic authority” for this form has now been shown as above.
4 Wessely, i., p. 120.
5 With the form θαβαωθ cf. ταβαωθ, Pap. Par. Bibl. nat. 113 (Wessely,
994 BIBLE STUDIES. (17
Bibl. nat. 1621 «.),! ὑμᾶς ἐξορκίζω κατὰ τοῦ iaw Kai τοῦ σαβαωθ καὶ abavat a" BartaBa (Pap. Par. Bibl. nat. 1484 «),? taBa εδδ caw (a gem-inscription) ὅ;
taBaw8!: ιαωθ ιαβαωθ (Pap. Par. Bibl. nat. 323), διὰ τὸ μέγα ἔνδοξον ὄνομα αβρααμ εμεινααεουβαωθ βαιθωβ εσια ιαβαωθ (Pap. Lond, ΟΧΧΙ. 8141.) ;
ιαβας: σὺ εἶ ιαβας σὺ εἶ ιαπως (Pap. Lond. xlvi. 104). A. Dieterich® thinks it superfluous ‘‘to seek ἃ ᾿Ιάβης or similar name” in this; it is but ‘‘ mystical play-work set down at random”. But the supposition that cvaBas and taTws are not mere capricious forms, but rather corrupt Grecisings of IaBe, is supported by the context of the whole passage, which belongs to those that are most strongly permeated by Jewish conceptions.
There may also be mentioned another series of forms, chiefly verbal combinations, in which this transcription appears, in part at ieast, to be contained. We mention only the examples: saB8w (Geoponica, ed. Niclas, i., 425) ;° ιαβουνη (Pap. Lond, xlvi.sw);'° the names of angels βαθιαβηλ and αβραθιαβρι (Pap. Lond. ¢xxi. 9+) ;" further, taSovx and vaBwy (Pap. Par. Bibl. nat. 2204).™
Even putting aside the last-quoted series of forms, we consider it to have nevertheless been made plain that IaBe must have enjoyed an extraordinary popularity in the Magic Literature. Now this may appear strange if we re- member the observation given by the Fathers that it was the Samaritan pronunciation of the Tetragram: how did it get to Egypt and the land of the Cumean Sybil? The question,
i, p. 80), Pap. Lond. xlvi. 62, 63, in which the form :aBoe follows (Kenyon, p. 67; Wessely, i., p. 128), Pap. Lugd. J 384, iii. 7 (Fleck. Jahrbb. Suppl., xvi., p. 798; Leemans, ii., p. 15).
1 Wessely, i., p. 85. 2 Thid., p. 82.
3 Kopp, iv., p. 159 f. 4 Cf. above on ιαωθ.
5 Wessely, i., p. 126. 6 Kenyon, p. 94; Wessely, ii., p. 31. 7 Kenyon, p. 68; Wessely, i., p. 129. 8 Abr., p. 68.
9In R. Heim’s Incantamenta magica Graeca Latina; Fleck., Jahrbb. Suppl. xix. (1893), 523.
” Kenyon, p. 76, cf. the note to line 857; Wessely, i., pp. 138, 136.
11 Kenyon, p. 113; Wessely, ii., p. 52. 12 Wessely, i., p. 100.
18] THE TETRAGRAMMATON. 335
however, does not appear to the writer to be unanswerable. We must not of course so conceive of the dissemination of the form as if it had been consciously employed, in such various localities, as the true name of the Mighty God of the Jews ; the writer of the Cumezan tablet simply copied it along with other enigmatic and, of course, unintelligible magic formule from one of the numerous books of Magic, all of which, very probably—to judge from those still extant—point to Egypt as their native region. But Egypt was just the country which, because of the ethnological conditions, was most ready to trans- fer Jewish conceptions into its Magic. One may therefore not unjustifiably suppose that here especially the Tetragramma- ton was used by the magicians as a particularly efficacious Name in its correct pronunciation, which was, of course, still known to the Jews, though they shrank from using it, up to and into the Christian era. Thus we have been using the Ia8e not necessarily for the purpose of indicating the specifically Samaritan pronunciation as such, but rather as an evidence for the correct pronunciation. But we con- sider it quite possible to account for the occurrence of IaSe in Egyptian Papyri by ‘‘Samaritan’’ influence. Besides the Jews proper’ there were also Samaritans in Egypt. “Ptolemy I. Lagi in his conquest of Palestine had taken with him many prisoners-of-war not only from Judea and Jerusalem but also ‘from Samaria and those who dwelt in Mount Gerizim,’ and settled them in Egypt [Joseph. Antt. xi. 1]. In the time of Ptolemy VI. Philometor, the Jews and Samaritans are reported to have taken their dispute con- cerning the true centre of worship (Jerusalem or Gerizim) to the judgment-seat of the king [Joseph. Antt. xi, 34].”’? Some Papyri of the Ptolemaic period confirm the relatively early residence of Samaritans in Egypt. As early as the time of the second Ptolemy we find (Pap. Flind Petr. 11. iv.
1Cf. on the Jewish diaspora in Egypt, Hugo Willrich, Juden und Griechen vor der makkabdischen Hrhebung, Gottingen, 1895, p. 126 ff.; and, against Willrich, Schiirer, TiLZ. xxi. (1896), p. 35. Cf. also Wilcken, Berl. Philol. Wochenschrift, xvi. (1896), p. 1492 ff.
2 EK. Schiirer, Geschichte des jiidischen Volkes vm Zevtalter Jesu Christi, ii., Leipzig, 1886, p. 502 (= *iii., p. 24). [Emng. Trans., ii., ii., p. 230.]
336 BIBLE STUDIES. [19, 20
11)1 mention of a place Samaria in the Fayytim, and two inhabitants of this Samaria, Θεόφιλος and Πυῤῥίας, are named in Pap. Flind. Petr. ii. xxviui.2 Even more im- portant, in this connection, than such general information, is a passage in the supposed letter of Hadrian to Servianus, in which it is said that the Samaritans in Egypt, together with the Jews and Christians dwelling in that country, are all Astrologers, Aruspices and Quacksalvers* This is of course an exaggeration ; but still the remark, even if the letter is spurious, is direct evidence of the fact that magic and its allied arts were common among the Egyptian Samaritans. We may also refer here to Acts vii.: Simon the magian was altogether successful among the Samaritans: “to him they all gave heed, from the least to the greatest, saying, This man 15 that power of God which is called Great”.’ As the Divine name played a great part in the adjurations, we may conclude that the Samaritan magicians used it too—naturally in the form familiar to them. From them it was transferred, along with other Palestinian matter, to the Magic Literature, and thus it is explained why we should find it in a remote region, scratched by some one unknown, full of superstitious dread, upon the lead of the minatory magical tablet.
1In J. P. Mahaffy, The Flinders Petrie Papyri, ii., Dublin, 1893 [14]. The paging of the text is always given in brackets [ ] in Mahaffy. Vol. i. was published in Dublin, 1891.
2 Mahaffy, ii. [97], conjectures that these are translations of Hidad and Esau. With this he makes the further conjecture that the name Θεόφιλος, common in the imperial period, occurs here for the first time. But the name is found earlier, and Mahaffy’s question whether it is perhaps a ‘‘ Jewish in- vention” must be answered in the negative.—The author has made further observations on Samaria in the Fayyim in ThLZ. xxi. (1896), p. 611.
3 Mahaftfy, ii. [87] ff.
4 Vopisc., vita Saturnini, c. 81 (Scriptores historiae Augustae, ed. Peter, vol. ii., p. 225): nemo illic archisynagogus Judaeorum, nemo Samarites, nemo Christianorum presbyter non mathematicus, non haruspex, non aliptes. Schiirer refers to this passage, ii., p. 502 (= iii., p. 24). [HEng. Trans., IT., ii., p. 230.] Cf. also c. 74.
> Compare with the expression 7 δύναμις τοῦ θεοῦ ἡ καλουμένη μεγάλη, Pap. Par. Bibl. nat. 1275 tt. (Wessely, i., 76), ἐπικαλοῦμαί σε Thy μεγίστην δύναμιν τὴν ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ (ἄλλοι: Thy ἐν τῇ ἄρκτῳ) ὑπὸ κυρίου θεοῦ τεταγμένην. See also Harnack, Bruchstiicke des Evangeliums und der Apokalypse des Petrus (TU. ix. 2), 2 Aufl., Leipzig, 1893, p. 65 f.
NEE:
SPICILEGIUM.

Lee , 3 / ἵνα μή τι ἀπόληται.


1, THE CHRONOLOGICAL STATEMENT IN THE PROLOGUE TO JESUS SIRACH.
Ἔν yap τῷ ὀγδόῳ καὶ τριακοστῷ ἔτει ἐπὶ τοῦ ᾿Ενυεργέτου βασιλέως παραγενηθεὶς εἰς Αἴγυπτον καὶ συγχρονίσας εὗρον οὐ μικρᾶς παιδείας ἀφόμοιον : of this chronological statement of the grandson of the son of Sirach, which is of the highest importance not only as regards the date of the book itself, but also, on account of the other contents of the prologue, for the history of the Old Testament canon, various inter- pretations are given.! If it be ‘‘a matter of course” that the writer of the Prologue wishes to indicate, not the year of his own life, but the thirty-eighth year of King Kuergetes,? no doubt can exist as to the year in which the writer came to Egypt; of the two Ptolemies who bore the surname of Huergetes, the reign of the second only, Ptolemy VII. Physcon, extended to thirty-eight years, and hence the date given in the Prologue would signify the year 132 B.c. But when we find a writer like L. Hug preferring the other interpretation,’ we cannot but feel that there must be a difficulty somewhere. The chief support of those who inter- pret the date as the year of the prologue-writer’s age, and, at the same time, the chief difficulty of the other inter- pretation, lie in the ἐπί which stands between the number and the name of the king. ‘ La préposition ἐπί parait ici tout ἃ fait superflwe, puisque toujours le mot ἔτους est swivi d'un gémitif direct. On ne dit jamais ἔτους πρώτου, δευτέρου. . . ἐπὶ τινός, en parlant d'un roi, mais bien ἔτους... τινός OW τῆς βασιλείας τινός. Cette locution serait donc sans exemple”: the difficulty in question may be formulated in these words of
1See O. F. Fritzsche, HApAT. v. (1859), p. xiii. ff. 2 Schiirer, ii., p. 595 (= 7iii., p. 159). [Hng. Trans., ii., ili., Ὁ. 26.] 3 Cf. HApAT. v. (1859), p. xv.
340 BIBLE STUDIES. [256
Letronne,' written in reference to a passage in the Inscrip- tion of Rosetta to be noticed presently.
The difficulty, nevertheless, can be removed. But certainly not by simply referring, as does Ὁ. Β΄. Fritzsche,” to the passages LXX Hagg. 11, 21, Zech. 17, 71,1 Mace. 13, 147, to which may be added LXX Zech. 1}, for, all these passages being translations of Semitic originals, the ἐπί might be a mere imitation of > and would thus yield nothing decisive for the idiom of the Prologue to Sirach, which was in Greek from the first. The following passages seem to the present writer to be of much greater force. In an Inscription from the Acropolis,? as old as the 3rd cent. B.c., we find in line 24: the words ἱερεὺς γενόμενος ἐν TO ἐπὶ ΜΠυσιάδου ἄρχοντος ἐνιαυτῷ. Still more significant for the passage in Sirach are the following parallels of Egyptian origin. The Inscrip- tion of the Rosetta Stone (27th March, 196 B.c.), line 16,* runs thus: προσέταξεν [Ptolemy V. Epiphanes] δὲ καὶ περὶ TOV ἱερέων, ὅπως μηθὲν πλεῖον διδῶσιν εἰς TO τελεστικὸν οὗ ἐτάσσοντο ἕως τοῦ πρώτου ἔτους ἐπὶ τοῦ πατρὸς αὐτοῦ [Ptolemy IV. Philopator]. Though Letronne, in view of the alleged want of precedent for this usage of é7i,° tries a different interpretation, he is yet forced to acknowledge that, if we translate the concluding words by until the first year [of the reign] of his father, the whole sentence is made to fit most appropriately into the context ;® the priests, who are hardly inclined to speak of the merits of Epiphanes for nothing, would be again but manifesting their ability to do obeisance to him, and, at the same time, to extol the memory of his father. Had Letronne known the example
1 Recueil, i. (1842), p. 277. ee} sabi
3 Bulletin de corr. hell., i. (1877), p. 36 f.
4In Letronne, Recwerl, i., p. 246 = CIG. iii., No. 4697. Lumbroso, Recherches, p. xxi., has already referred to this.
5 See his words as cited above. J. Franz, in C/G. iii., p. 338, agrees with Letronne, and refers to line 2 of the Inscription. But the present writer is again unable to see how the words occurring there, viz., ἕως Tov ὀγδόου ἔτους, can signify the years of the priests’ service.
6The author thinks that the explanation given by Letronne (year of their priesthood) is somewhat forced.

257, 258] EDICT AGAINST EGYPTIAN JEWS. 341
from the Prologue to Sirach, perhaps he would have decided for this way of taking ἐπί, which so admirably suits the context. The two passages mutually support one another. But the usage of ἐπί is further confirmed by other passages of Egyptian origin. In Pap. Par. 15:1 (120 B.c.) two αὐγύπο- Tat συγγραφαί are mentioned, which are dated as follows: μιᾶς μὲν γεγονυίας [τοῦ IH’ ἔτους παχ]ὼν ἐπὶ τοῦ Φιλομή- τορος, the one of Pachon (Kgyptian month) of the 18th year (of the reign) of Philometor; ἑτέρας δὲ γεγονυίας τοῦ AE’ μεσορὴ ἐπὶ τοῦ αὐτοῦ βασιλέως, the other of Mesore [Egyptian month} (of the year) 35 (of the reign) of the same king. Finally, Pap. Par. δ᾽ begins thus: βασιλευόντων Κλεοπάτρας καὶ Πτολεμαίου θεῶν Φιλομητόρων Σωτήρων ἔτους A’ ἐφ᾽ ἱερέως βασιλέως Πτολεμαίου θεοῦ Φιλομήτορος Σωτῆρος ᾿Αλεξάνδρου καὶ θεῶν Σ᾽ωτήρων, κτὰ. If the interpretation advocated by Brunet against Brugsch,? viz., under King Ptolemy .... , the priest of Alexander [the Great] and of the gods be correct, then this passage also must be taken into consideration.
The pleonastic ἐπί of the Prologue to Sirach is thus sup- ported by several authorities of about the same date and place. Hence also, in the light of this result, the passages from the Greek Bible, cited above, acquire a new signi- ficance. The pleonastic ἐπί found in these is not to be explained by that excessive scrupulosity of the translators which manifests itself elsewhere; in point of fact, their desire to translate literally was assisted by a peculiar idiom of their locality, and hence we have a translation which is at once literal and accurate.
2. THE SUPPOSED EDICT OF PTOLEMY IV. PHILO- PATOR AGAINST THE EGYPTIAN JEWS.
In 3 Macc. 81 15 quoted a decree of Ptolemy IV. Philopator against the Egyptian Jews, according to which a reward is promised to every one who informs against a Jew. In our editions the Greek text of verse” runs thus: μηνύειν
1 Notices, xviii. 2, Ὁ. 220 f. 2 Tbid., p. 130. 8 Ibid., p. 153. Brugsch translates thus: under the priest of ‘ the” kung Ptolemy. ...
942 BIBLE STUDIES. [258
δὲ τὸν βουλόμενον ἐφ᾽ ᾧ THY οὐσίαν TOD ἐμπίπτοντος ὑπὸ THY εὔθυναν λήψεται καὶ ἐκ τοῦ βασιλικοῦ ἀργυρίου δραχμὰς δισχιλίας καὶ τῆς ἐλευθερίας τεύξεται καὶ στεφανωθήσεται. Grimm! explains the ungrammatical (constructionslos) accusa- tive at the beginning of the verse as an anacoluthon,—as if the writer had in his mind some such construction as εἰς τὴν ἐλευθερίαν ἀφαιρησόμεθα. In that case we translate as fol- lows: him, however, who is willing to inform against a Jew—he shall receive, in addition to the property of him upon whom the punishment falls, two thousand silver drachmae from the royal treasury, shall obtain his freedom, and shall be crowned with a garland. A most extraordinary proclamation,—extraordinary even for the third Book of Maccabees, which is by no means wanting in extraordinary things. “It cannot but seem strange that slaves only are invited to become informers, and that this fact is announced quite indirectly, and, what is more, only at the end of the statement.”* But even this invitation, which, in the circumstances related in the book, is by no means impossible, does not appear so strange to the present writer as the proffered reward, which, in con- sideration of the great ease with which an information might be lodged against any individual Jew among so many,* is hardly less than horrifying: not so much, indeed, the monetary reward, as the declaration that the slave who acted as informer was to receive not only his freedom, but also the honour which was the special prerogative of dis- tinguished men, viz., the being crowned with a garland. The passage thus awakes suspicion of its being corrupt, and, as a matter of fact, the Alexandrinus, as well as other manuscripts, omits τεύξεται καὶ, and reads thus: καὶ τὴς ἐλευθερίας στεφανωθήσεται. But nothing is really gained thereby, for this reading, as such, gives no sense—though, indeed, its very unintelligibility makes it probable that it represents the older, though already corrupt, form of the
1 HApAT. iv. (1857), p. 249. 2 Grimm, wid.
3 According to 4%, the number of the Jews was so enormous that, when their names were being entered in the lists before their execution, pens and papyrus ran short !
959] EDICT AGAINST EGYPTIAN JEWS. 343
text, by which the received reading can be explained as being an attempt to make the statement more plausible. Hence Grimm gives it the preference, and ‘“ cannot hesitate for a moment” to accept the emendation of Grotius, viz., καὶ τοῖς ᾿Ελευθερίοις στεφανωθήσεται, 1.6., and he shall be crowned at the feast of the Hleutheria. The alteration is certainly not extensive, and the conjecture has at all events the advantage of explaining away the invitation to the slaves, which seems so offensive to its proposer. Neverthe- less, O. F. Fritzsche! hesitates to accept it, and, as we think, not without good reason. We know nothing of any feast of the Eleutheria as a custom in Egypt under the Ptolemies, and it is extremely precarious to take refuge in a conjecture which, by introducing an entirely new historical consideration, would give the text such a very special meaning.
The author believes that the following facts from Egyptian sources contribute something towards the elucida- tion of the verse.
In the first place, for the supposed ‘ construction-less ’ accusative μηνύειν δὲ τὸν βουλόμενον, reference might have been made to the similar, apparently absolute, infinitive at the end of the edict of Ptolemy II. Philadelphus which is given in the Epistle of Aristeas (ed. M. Schmidt), p. 17f.,
. Ν fal viz., τὸν δὲ βουλόμενον προσαγγέλλειν περὶ τῶν ἀπειθησάντων
3
ἐπὶ τοῦ φανέντος ἐνόχου τὴν κυρίαν ἕξειν (p. 1872.) ; as a matter of fact, ἕξειν depends upon the technical διευλήφαμεν of the previous sentence. Similarly we might construe the μηνύειν δὲ τὸν βουλόμενον with the dvecdjpapyev of verse”. We cannot but perceive that there is on the whole a certain similarity between the official formule of the two edicts, and it seems very natural to suppose that, even if both are spurious, yet in form they fully represent the official style of the Ptolemaic period. In fact, a comparison of this Maccabean passage with Pap. Par. 10” (145 B.c.)—a
1 Τῇ a critical note upon the text of the passage in his edition of the Old Testament Apocrypha. 2 Notices, xviii. 2, p. 178 f.
844 BIBLE STUDIES. [260
warrant for the apprehension of two runaway slaves—raises the supposition to a certainty. The warrant first gives an exact description of each fugitive, and then sets forth a reward for their recapture, or for information concerning their whereabouts. When we place the two passages in parallel columns as below, we see at once the remarkable similarity between the formule employed in each; be it noted that the Maccabean passage has been correctly punctuated.
3 Mace. 32s. Pap. Par. 10. / \ \ a a ΕΝ > / μηνύειν δὲ τὸν βου- τοῦτον ὃς ἂν ἀναγάγῃ / 3.5 a \ > i / a / Nopevov, eh ᾧ τὴν οὐσίαν λήψεται χαλκοῦ τάλαντα τοῦ ἐμπίπτοντος ὑπὸ τὴν εὔ- δύο τρισχιλίας (δραχμάς). θυναν λήψεται καὶ ἐκ τοῦ ἐνννν μηνύειν δὲ τὸν βου- βασιλικοῦ ἀργυρίου δραχμὰς λόμενον τοῖς παρὰ τοῦ στρα-
δισχιλίας [Codd. 19, 64, 93, τηγοῦ. Syr.: τρισχιλίας].
In reference to the absolute μηνύειν δὲ τὸν βουλόμενον of the Papyrus, the French editor! remarks that the in- finitive does duty for the imperative, as in similar formule generally. It would perhaps be more accurate, especially as the imperative infinitive is itself to be explained as a breviloquence, to make the infinitive depend upon a verb of command which the edict tacitly presupposes.”, We must, in any case, reject the hypothesis of an anacoluthon in the Maccabean passage ; 1t would destroy the impression given by the peculiarly official style of the edict. The words μηνύειν δὲ τὸν βουλόμενον are a complete sentence in themselves: he shall inform, who so desires. Hence the comparison in- stituted above is not without interest for the criticism of
1 Notices, xviii. 2, Ὁ. 203.
2Cf. διειλήφαμεν in the other two edicts. The official language of the Ptolemaic period may depend here also (ante, p. 104 ff.) on the usage of Greek jurisprudence. The identical usage of the infinitive is found in an Inscription on a building in Tegea (ca. 3rd cent. B.c., Arcadian dialect), line ut.: ἰμφαῖνεν δὲ Thu βολόμενον ἐπὶ Tot ἡμίσσοι Tas (apiav (edited by P. Cauer; see p. 114, note 2, above). These examples of the absolute infinitive in edicts might be largely supplemented from Inscriptions.
261] EDICT AGAINST EGYPTIAN JEWS. 345
the third Book of Maccabees; while, conversely, it may be maintained that the Ptolemaic edicts in Jewish-Alexandrian literature, even if they were each and all spurious, and were without value as sources for the facts, are yet of great historical importance, in so far, that is,1 as they faithfully represent the forms of official intercourse.
What, then, shall we say of the ‘“‘ extraordinary” pro- clamation at the end of v.*? There is no necessity what- ever that we should connect the passage itself (according to the ordinary reading) with slaves; the present writer is surprised that Grimm did not perceive the much more obvious explanation, viz., that the invitation is really directed to the Jews. The edict threatened their freedom and their lives, as may not only be inferred from the circum- stances of the case, but as is also confirmed by the expression of their feelings once the danger had been happily averted : they felt that they were ἀσινεῖς, ἐλεύθεροι, ὑπερχαρεῖς." Hence when those who appeared as king’s evidence against their proscribed brethren were thereby promised the freedom _which was otherwise in danger, the bargain was an exceed- ingly tempting one. It is, finally, quite unnecessary to speak of a crowning of the informer. Assuming that the reading of the Alexandrinus, καὶ τῆς ἐλευθερίας στεφανωθήσεται, is the older—though itself a corrupt—form of the text, the author would propose to make a trivial alteration, and read καὶ τῇ ἐλευθερίᾳ στεφανωθήσεται" The verb στεφανόω has not infrequently the general meaning reward,‘ and this is what it means here.
ΤῸ say nothing of their value as indicating the wishes and ideas of the writers of them.
23 Mace. 7 2.
5 In τῇ ἐλευθερίᾳ στεφανωθήσεται, ἐλευθερίας might very easily arise from dittography, and this error, again, might result in τῆς ἐλευθερίας.
+ Brunet de Presle, Notices, xviii. 2, p. 308; he refers, inter alia, to Polyb. xiii. 95, ἐστεφάνωσαν τὸν ᾿Αντίοχον πεντακοσίοις ἀργυρίου ταλάντοις, and to the use of στεφάνιον for reward in Pap. Par. 42 (156 B.c.); on this cf. the Thesaurus, and Lumbroso, Recherches, p. 235.—In reference to the whole subject see now H. Ziebarth, Popularklagen mit Delatorenpraémien nach griechischem Recht, in Hermes, xxxii. (1897), pp. 609-628.
346 BIBLE STUDIES. [262
3. THE ‘“ LARGE LETTERS” AND THE “ MARKS OF JESUS” IN GAL. 6.
Paul began his preaching of the gospel to the Gala- tians in most promising circumstances ; they received the invalid traveller as a messenger of God, yea, as if it had been the Saviour himself who sank down upon their thres- hold under the burden of the cross. Whereas others might have turned from Paul with loathing, they came to him, aye, and would have given away their eyes if by so doing they could have helped him. And then with childlike piety they gazed upon the majestic Form which the stranger pictured to them. Ever afterwards they were his children ; and like a father’s, indeed, are the thoughts which, across land and sea, bind him to the far-off churches of Galatia. True, he knows that they had forsaken their native idols with the zeal of the newly-awakened, but he also knows that they had not followed up this advance by full realisation of the sacred fellowship in which the majesty of the living Christ ever anew assumes human form. The confession regarding his own life in Christ, which Paul, on the very eve of his martyrdom, made to his dearest friends, had been confirmed in his own mind by the painful yet joyful experi- ence of his long apostolic labours among the churches: Not as though I had already attained! So then, as he left these infant churches in Asia Minor, his heart, full of love and gratitude, would yet have some foreboding of the dangers which their isolation might bring about ; we cannot imagine that he was one to think, with the blind affection of a father, that the newly-awakened had no further need of tutors and governors. Nay, but rather that,as he prayed to the Father on their behalf, his remembrance of them would be all the more fervent.
With their good-natured Gallic flightiness of disposition, these young Christians, left to themselves, succumbed to the wiles of their tempters. Paul was compelled to recognise that here too, the wicked enemy, who was always sowing tares among his wheat, did not labour in vain. Im their
263] ‘“‘LARGE LETTERS’”’ AND ‘‘ MARKS OF JESUS”’. 347
simple-hearted ignorance the Galatians had allowed them- selves to be bewitched by the word of the Law, and, in course of time, their idea of the man whom they had once honoured as their father in Christ became somewhat dis- torted in the lhght which streamed from national and theological animosity.
How shall we figure to ourselves the feelings of the Apostle as the news of this reached his ears? If we would understand not only the words, but, so to speak, also the spirit, of the Letter to the Galatians, we must, above all, endeavour to bring home to our minds the movements of this marvellous human soul. The keen biting polemic of the missive gives us to know exactly how Paul judged of the legal particularism of his opponents; it was the salutary indignation of the reformer that guided his pen here. But we dare not assume that he meted out the same measure to the tempted as to their tempters. The bitter incisiveness with which he speaks of these churches does not proceed from the self-willed sullenness of the mis- interpreted benefactor who is pleased to pose as a martyr: it is rather the lament of the father who, in the unfilial conduct of his son, sees but the evil which the wrong-doer brings upon himself. The harsh and formal speech of the first page or two of the letter is that of the παιδαγωγὸς εἰς Χριστόν. But he speaks thus only incidentally ; once he has risen above the warfare of embittering words to the praise of the faith in Christ which may again be theirs, the warm feelings of the old intimacy will no longer be subdued, and the man who a moment before had feared that his labour among these foolish ones had been in vain, changes his tone and speaks as if he were addressing the Philippians or his friend Philemon.
As in his other letters, so in this does Paul add to the words he had dictated to his amanuensis a postscript in his. own handwriting. More attention ought to be paid to the concluding words of the letters generally; they are of the highest importance if we are ever to understand the Apostle. The conclusion of the Letter to the Galatians is certainly a
948 BIBLE STUDIES. [264
very remarkable one. Once again, in short and clear anti- theses, the Law and Christ are set over against each other; and, moreover, the fact that it is only his opponents whom he now treats severely, fully consorts with the mood of reconciliation with the church, to which, in course of writing, he had been brought. The letter does not close with com- plaints against the Galatians ; and in view of the occasion of the letter, this must be taken as signifying very much the same as what can be observed in the conclusion of other letters called forth by opposition, viz., the express indication of the cordiality that subsisted between the writer and the readers. Paul has again attained to perfect peace—so far, at least, as concerns his Galatian brethren; and we are of opinion that in this placid frame of mind lies the explanation of the much-discussed words at the beginning of the auto- graph conclusion: See with how large letters 1 write unto you with mine own hand. The true mode of interpreting these words is to take them as a piece of amiable irony, from which the readers might clearly realise that it was no rigorous pedagogue that was addressing them. The amanuensis, whose swift pen was scarcely able to record the eloquent flow of Paul’s dictation upon the coarse papyrus leaves, had a minute commonplace handwriting. Between his fluent hand and that of Paul there was a pronounced difference — not only in the Letter to the Galatians. Surely it is hardly quite accurate to say that Paul used large letters in the present isolated instance for the purpose of marking the importance of the words to follow. The large letters naturally suggest that the explanation rather lies in the formal and external matter of caligraphy, and the fact that Paul calls special attention to them can only be explained, as we think, on the theory indicated above. Large letters are calculated to make an impression on children; and it is as his own dear foolish children that he treats the Galatians, playfully trusting that surely the large letters will touch their hearts. When Paul condescended to speak in such a
1 See the remarks of Mahaffy, i., p. 48.
965] ‘“THE MARKS OF JESUS.” 349
way, the Galatians knew that the last shadows of castigatory sternness had died from his countenance. The real stern- ness of the letter was by no means obliterated thereby ; but the feeling of coolness that might have remained behind was now happily wiped away by Paul’s thrice-welcome good- natured irony, and the readers were now all the more ready to receive the final message that still lay on his heart.
The closing words present no difficulty in themselves. It is only the last sentence but one'—one of the strangest utterances of Paul—which is somewhat enigmatical. Tod λοιποῦ" κόπους μοι μηδεὶς παρεχέτω" ἐγὼ γὰρ τὰ στίγματα τοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ ἐν τῷ σώματί μου βαστάξω, henceforth let no man trouble me, for I bear in my body (R.V. branded on my body) the marks of Jesus. Two questions arise here: first, what does. Paul mean by the marks of Jesus ? and, secondly, to what extent does he base the warning, that no one shall trouble him, upon his bearing of these marks ?
“στίγματα ..are signs, usually letters of the alphabet (Lev. 1978), which were made upon the body (especially on the forehead and the hands) by branding or puncturing,— on slaves as a symbol of their masters, on soldiers as a symbol of their leaders, on criminals as a symbol of their crime, and also, among some oriental peoples, as a symbol of the deity they served (3 Macc. 2”, ..).”? Hence an ancient reader would know perfectly well what these stig- mata were, but the very variety of their possible application renders less evident the special reference in the case before us. In any case, it seems to us quite evident that Paul is speaking metaphorically ; is alluding, in fact, to the scars of the wounds he had received in his apostolic labours,* and not to actual, artificially-produced στίγματα. Sieffert° decides in favour of the hypothesis that Paul’s intention was to describe himself as the slave of Christ; but in that case, how can the γάρ possibly be explained? We feel, in fact, that the γάρ is of itself sufficient to invalidate the hypothesis. Had Paul said the exact contrary; had
Galo.” 2 For τοῦ λοιποῦ cf. W. Schmid, Der Atticismus, iii., p. 135. °F. Sieffert, Meyer, vii. 7 (1886), p. 375. 42 Cor. 11. 5P. 376.
350 BIBLE STUDIES. [266
he said, for instance, Henceforth go on troubling me as you will,.—then the γάρ would have admirably fitted the con- text; that is, Paul might have gone ΟἹ to say, with proud resignation, I am accustomed to that, for I am naught but a despised slave of Jesus Christ.
No one will seriously contend that Paul wished to com- pare himself with a branded criminal; and the reference to the tattooing of soldiers would seem equally far-fetched. The yap speaks against the latter explanation quite as forcibly as against the hypothesis of slave-marks; for the miles christianus does not quench the fiery darts of the Evil One by striking a treaty, but by going forth to active warfare, armed with the shield of faith.
The explanation of Wetstein? still seems to us to be the best; according to this, Paul means sacred signs, in virtue of which he is declared to be one consecrated to Christ, one therefore whom no Christian dare molest. But Wetstein, too, fails adequately to show the causal relation between the two clauses, and as little does he justify the unquestionably strange periphrasis here used to express metaphorically the idea of belonging to Christ.*
Provisionally accepting, however, this theory of the στίγματα, we might represent the causal relation somewhat as follows: Anyone who bears the marks of Jesus is His disciple, and, as such, is under His protection ; hence any- one who offends against Paul lays himself open to the punishment of a stronger Power. We should thus be led to look upon the στίγματα as sacred protective-marks, and to interpret our passage in connection with certain lines of thought to which B. Stade has recently called attention. Already in the Old Testament, according to him, we find not
1Cf. J. J. Wetstein, Novwm Testamentum Graecum, ii., Amsterdam, 1752, p. 238 f.: ““ Notae enim serviles potius invitabant aliorum contumeliam”’.
2P, 238: “ Sacras notas intelligit Paulus; se sacrum esse, cur ideo nemo eorum, qui Christum amant, molestus esse debeat, profitetur”’.
5 Besides, Paul does not speak of the marks of Christ at all; he uses the name Jesus, otherwise rare in his writings.
4 Beitrdge zur Pentateuchkritik, ZA W. xiv. (1894), p. 250 ff.
267] ‘““THE MARKS OF JESUS.” 351
a few indications of such protective-marks. He explains the mark of Cain as such, but, even apart from this, reference may be made to Is. 44°! and Ezek. 9;? in the latter passage we read that, before the angels bring ruin upon Jerusalem and destroy its inhabitants, one of them sets a mark upon the forehead of all those who mourn for the abominations practised in the city; these are spared by the destroying angels.? In Lev. 19”*,* 215, Deut. 141%, there is likewise implied an acquaintance with sacred signs by which the bearer indicates that he belongs to a certain deity: were the Israelites to permit of the sign of another god among them, they would thereby rupture their special relation to Jahweh as being His people. Circumcision, too, may be looked upon as a mark of Jahweh.®? The following passages, belonging to a later time, may be mentioned : ® Psal. Sol. 15° ὅτι τὸ σημεῖον τοῦ θεοῦ ἐπὶ δικαίους εἰς σωτηρίαν, cf. v.'°, where it is said of the ποιοῦντες ἀνομίαν that they have τὸ σημεῖον τῆς ἀπωλείας ἐπὶ τοῦ μετώπου αὐτῶν ; according to 3 Macc, 2” the Alexandrian Jews were compelled by Ptolemy IV. Philopator to have branded upon them an ivy leaf, the sign of Dionysos, the king himself being similarly marked ;* Philo, de Monarchia (M.), p. 220 f., reproaches the Jewish apostates for allowing themselves to be branded with the signs of idols made with hands (ἔνιοι δὲ τοσαύτῃ κέχρηνται μανίας ὑπερβολῇ, ὥστ᾽... ἵενται πρὸς δουλείαν τῶν χειροκμήτων γράμμασιν αὐτὴν ὁμολογοῦντες .. .. ἐν τοῖς σώμασι καταστίζοντες αὐτὴν σιδήρῳ πεπυρωμένῳ πρὸς ἀνεξάλειπτον διαμονήν" οὐδὲ γὰρ χρόνῳ ταῦτα ἀμαυροῦν-
1 καὶ ἕτερος ἐπιγράψει χειρὶ αὐτοῦ - τοῦ θεοῦ εἰμι; See the remarks upon 1 Kings 20* ff, and Zech. 13° in Stade, p. 313, also p. 314 ff.
2 Stade, p. 301.
3 Stade also draws attention to the protective-marks of the Passover night; as these, however, were not made upon the body, they come less into consideration here. But note that in Exod. 13%: 16 the feast of the Passover is compared to a sign upon the hand and upon the forehead.
4 Note that the LXX has γράμματα στικτά here.
> Gen. 17", Rom. 41}; cf. on this point Stade, p. 308.
6 Cf., most recently, Stade, pp. 301, 303 ff.
7 Etymologicum Magnum, sub Τάλλος-.
952 BIBLE STUDIES. [268
rat); and similarly the worshippers of the beast in Revela- tion bear the name or the number of the beast as a χάραγμα on the forehead or on the right hand,’ while the faithful are marked with the name of the Lamb and of the living God? Finally—a fact which is specially instructive in regard to the significance of protective-marks in Greek Judaism—the The- phillin, prayer-fillets, were regarded as protective-marks, and were designated φυλακτήρια, the technical term for amulets. These various data are sufficient, in our opinion, to justify us in supposing that the Apostle might quite easily charac- terise his scars metaphorically as protective-marks.*
In confirmation of this supposition we feel that we must draw attention to a certain Papyrus passage, which seems to grow in significance the longer we contemplate it, and which, moreover, may even merit the attention of those who cannot at once accept the conclusions here drawn from it, as we think, with some degree of justification.
It is found in the bilingual (Demotic and Greek) Papyrus J. 383 (Papyrus Anastasy 65) of the Leiden Museum. C. J. C. Reuvens‘ was the first to call attention to it, assigning it to the first half of the 3rd cent. a.D.* Then it was published in fac-simile® and discussed’ by C.
1 Rev. 1336f., 149f., 162,197, 204. See ante, p. 240 fi.
2 Rev. 141, 72,94. On the meaning of signs in the Christian Church, see the suggestions of Stade, p. 304 ff.
= We think it probable that the expression forms an antithesis to the previously mentioned circwmcision (cf. Rom. 4 1 σημεῖον περιτομῆ5), and that emphasis is to be laid upon τοῦ Ἰησοῦ.
4 Lettres ἃ M. Letronne.. . sur les papyrus bilingues et grecs ... du musée dantiquités de Vuniversité de Leide, Leiden, 1830, i, pp. 3 ἢ, 36mm In the Atlas belonging to this work, Table A, some words from the passage under discussion are given in fac-simile.
5 Anpendice (to the work just cited), p. 151.
Papyrus égyptien démotique ἃ transcriptions grecques du musée d’an- tiquités des Pays-Bas ἃ Leide (description raisonnée, J. 383), Leiden, 1839. Our passage is found in Table IV., col. VIII.; in the tables the Papyrus is signed A. [= Anastasy ?] No. 65.
7 Monumens égyptiens du musée dantiquités des Pays-Bas ἃ Letde, Leiden, 1839.
969] ‘“THE MARKS OF JESUS.” 353
Leemans, the director of the museum, who has lately again ! indicated his agreement with Reuvens’ date. H. Brugsch ? has expressly emphasised the great importance of the Papyrus for the study of the Demotic, and has made most exhaustive use of it in his Demotic Grammar.’ He follows Reuvens and Leemans in describing it as Gnostic—a term that may either mean much or little. The passage in question has been recently discussed more or less elaborately by E. Revillout,* G. Maspero® and C. Wessely.®
It is found in the Demotic text of this ‘‘ Gnostic”’ Papyrus,’ which belongs to that literature of magic which has been handed down to us in extensive fragments, and recently brought to light. To judge from the fac-similes, its decipherment is quite easy—so far, at least, as it affects us here. First of all, the text, as we read it, is given, the various readings of Reuvens (Rs), Leemans (li), Brugsch (B), Maspero (M), Revillout (Rt) and Wessely (W) being also indicated.
It is introduced by a sentence in the Demotic which Revillout translates as follows: ‘‘ Powr parvenir ἃ étre aimé de quelqu'un qui lutte contre toi et ne veut pas te parler (dire) :”
1 Papyri graecit musei antiquarvi publict Lugduni-Batavi, ii., Leiden, 1885, p. 5.
2 Uber das dgyptische Museum zu Leyden, in the Zeitschr. der Deutschen morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, vi. (1852), p. 250 f.
3 Grammaire démotique, Berlin, 1855. A fac-simile of our passage is found on Table IX. of that book, a transcription on p. 202.
4 Les arts égyptiens, in the Revue égyptologique, i. (1880), p. 164; cf. the same author’s discussion of the Papyrus, ibid., ii. (1881-1882), p. 10 ff. His book, Le Roman de Setna, Paris, 1877, was not accessible to the present writer.
5 Collections du Musée Alaowi, premiére série, ὅθ livraison, Paris, 1890, p. 66 f.; see the same author’s discussion of the Papyrus in his Etudes démotiques, in the Recueil de travausx relatifs ἃ la philologie et ἃ Varchéologie égyptiennes et assyriennes, i. (1870), p. 19 ff. A study by Birch mentioned there is unknown to the present writer. Our passage is found on p. 30 f.
6 Mittheilungen aus der Sammlung der Papyrus Erzherzog Rainer, Ve (Vienna, 1892), p. 13 f.
7This Papyrus contains another and longer Greek incantation, most recently read and discussed by Revillout, Rev. ég., i. (1880), p. 168 f.
e
8554 BIBLE STUDIES. [270
In the original the spell occupies three and a half lines. A rent runs down the Papyrus column, nearly in the middle ; the number of the missing letters is indicated in the tran- script by dots, the ends of the original lines by |.
MHMEAINKEOAE ANOX ΠΑΠΙΠΕΤ.. METOTBANES BASTAZN|THNTAGHN TOTOSIPENSKAITIATN 5 ΚΑΤΑ. ἩΣΑΙΑΥΤΗΝΕΣ ΑΒΙΔΟΣ ΚΑΤΑΣΤΗΣΆΑΙΕΙΣ ΤΑΣΤΑΣΚΑΙΚΑΤΑΘΕΣΘΑΙ ΕΙΣ... XASEANMOIO4A ΚΟΠΟΥ͂Σ ΠΑΡΑΣΧΗ ΠΡΟΣ 10 PEPVNATTHNATTO 2 παπιπετ..: Rs. wamime..., L. παπιπετ., B. παπιπετ(ου), M. Papipetu, Rt. Παπεπιτου, W. παπιπετου | 4 ooipews : W. οσιριος [!] | δ kata.. nou: Rs. πατα(στη)σαι, L. κατα... nou, B. M. Rt. κατα- στησαι, W. κατα[ στη]σαι | es: Rs. B. M. Rt. εἰς, Li e.s | 7 racras: Rs. τας τας, B. ras tapas, W. ras ras sic | 8... yas: Rs. (u)axas, L. . axas, M. αλχας, W...axas | A: B. M. Rt. interpret as dewa, W. δ(ε)ι(να) | 9 ρεψω: B. M. Rt. τρεψω, W. φερω | The editors differ from one another principally in their reproduction (or restoration) of the non-Greek words in the text. As these are irrelevant to our present purpose, we shall not further pursue the subject, feeling constrained to follow Maspero in reading thus :— My pe δίωκε ὅδε: avox Tat imeT| ou] μετουβανες " βαστάζω τὴν ταφὴν τοῦ Ocipews καὶ ὑπάγω ὅ κατα[στ]ῆσαι αὐτὴν ε(ὺ)ς "AB.bos, καταστῆσαι εἰς ταστας καὶ καταθέσθαι εἰς [αλΊχας - ἐάν μοι ὁ δεῖνα κόπους παράσχη, προσ- 10 (τ)ρέψω αὐτὴν αὐτῷ. In the Papyrus a Demotic rendering of the incantation follows the Greek text,—not literal, indeed, but showing a
271] ‘“THE MARKS OF JESUS.” 355
few variations. This Demotic version is thus rendered by Revillout : 1
““ Ne me persécute pas,une telle !—Je suis Papipetouw Metou- banés, je porte le sépulcre d’ Osiris, je vais le transporter ὦ Abydos; je le ferai reposer dans les Alkah. Si une telle me résiste aujourd’ hut, Je le renverserat.—Dire sept fois.”
We perceive at once that we have here a formula of adjuration. The following notes will help towards an under- standing of the Greek text.
Line 1. The commentators take avoy to be the Coptic anok (of. XDI) Lam. In the Greek books of magic we very frequently find similar instances of the é ἐγώ εἰμι followed by the divine name, by which the adjurer identifies himself with the particular deity in order to invest his spell with special efficacy, and to strike the demon with terror.
L. 2. We have not as yet discovered any satisfactory etymological explanation of the words παπίπετου μετουβανες ; Reuvens and Leemans give nothing more than conjectures. It is sufficient for our purpose to remember that such foreign words play a very great part in adjurations. Even if they had originally any meaning at all, it is yet unlikely that those who used the formula ever knew it; the more mysterious the words of their spell sounded, the more efficacious did they deem it.
L. 3. The editors translate τὴν ταφὴν tod ‘Ocipews as the coffin, or the mummy, of Osiris, ταφή in this sense is of frequent occurrence in the Papyri and elsewhere.’ By this ταφὴ τοῦ ‘Ocipews we must understand a model of the coffin or of the mummy of Osiris used as an amulet. The efficacy
1 Cf. also the translation of Brugsch, Gramm. dém., p. 202.
2 Notices, xviii. 2, pp. 234, 435 f. Wessely, Mitth. Rainer, v., Ὁ. 14, explains that “ταφή here means mummy, as we learn in particular from the language of the wooden tablets which were employed in the conveyance of mummies as labels of recognition”. See also Leemans, Monumens, Ὁ. 8.— Ὁ. Schmidt, Hin altchristliches Mumienetikett in the Zeitschr. fiir die agyptische Sprache und Alterthumskunde, xxxii. (1894), p. ὅδ, says, ‘‘I am of opinion that in Roman times ταφή was understood as the ‘mummy’ only”’.
356 BIBLE STUDIES. [272
of this amulet is explained by the Osiris myth The Osiris of Graeco-Roman times was the god of the dead. His corpse, dismembered by Typhon, was again put together with the greatest difficulty by Isis; and it was ever after- wards the most cherished task of Isis, Nephthys, Horus, Anubis and Hermes, deities friendly to Osiris, to guard his tomb, and to prevent the wicked Typhon from repeating his mutilation of the divine body. The magicians took advantage of this conflict among the gods in order to make sure of the assistance of those who were friendly to Osiris. They strove to get possession of the sacred coffin; they carried it about with them—at least in effigie, as an amulet— and they threatened to demolish it if their desires were not fulfilled. Thus, according to Jamblichus,? the threats to destroy the heavens, to reveal the mysteries of Isis, to divulge the meffable secret hidden in the depths, to stay the sacred sun- barge, to gratify Typhon by scattering the limbs of Osiris belong to the βιαστικαὶ ἀπειλαί of the Egyptian magicians. The adjuration under notice is an efficacious minatory formula of this kind. It is directed to a demon, who is believed to be the cause of the difficulties which, it is hoped, will be eluded by its means ; ὅ the possession of the ταφὴ Tod ᾿᾽Οσίρεως cannot but impress him, being a guarantee for the support of the most powerful deities, seeing that it was to their own best interests to be favourable to the possessor of the im- perilled mummy. A quite similar menace, made by some “obscure gentleman,’ is found in a _recently-published tabula devotionis* from Adrumetum: if not, 1 shall go down to the holy places of Osiris, and break his corpse im pieces, and throw it into the rwer to be borne away.
1 ΤῊ reference to what follows, see Maspero, Coll. Al., p. 66.
2 De mystervis, 65 (ed. G. Parthey, Berol., 1857, p. 245 f.): ἢ yap τὸν οὐρανὸν προσαράξειν ἢ τὰ κρυπτὰ τῆς Ἴσιδος ἐκφανεῖν ἢ τὸ ἐν ἀβύσσῳ ἀπόρρητον [for this we find, 67, p. 248, τὰ ἐν ᾿Αβύδῳ ἀπόρρητα; cf. 1. 6 of our formula] δείξειν A στήσειν Thy Bap, ἢ τὰ μέλη τοῦ ᾿Οσίριδος διασκεδάσειν τῷ Τυφῶνι.
5. Reuvens, i., p. 41. 4 See p. 279.
5 Collections du Musée Alaoui, prem. série, 5° livraison (1890), p. 60: Si minus, descendo ingadytus Osyris et dissolvam τὴν ταφὴν et mattam, ut ἃ flumine feratur. See Maspero’s explanatory notes,
273] ‘‘THE MARKS OF JESUS.” 357
L. 6. "ABidos is the Egyptian Abydos. The town is of great importance in the history of Osiris. It was looked upon as the burial-place of the god, and its mysteries are spoken of by several ancient writers.!_ The assertion of the bearer of the amulet, viz., that he is about to convey the mummy of Osiris to Abydos, seems to us to signify that he wishes, by means of an act which exercises a secret influence upon the friends of Osiris, to be all the more assured of their favour, and all the more dangerous to the demon.
L. 7 and 8. taoras and adyas are the Greek transcrip- tions of two Egyptian words which are rendered by Maspero? as les retraites and les demeures ¢ternelles respectively. They help us to obtain a clearer understanding of the preceding lines: the user of the spell, in thus reverently entombing the body which Typhon had abused, lays the most powerful deities under the highest obligation to himself.
L. 8. ὁ δεῖνα is represented in the original by the abbreviation 4, which is frequently used in the Papyri in the same way; when the formula prescribed in the book of magic was actually used against some troublesome person, this person’s name was substituted for the ὁ δεῖνα, just as the name of the demon who was the cause of the κόποι took the place of the ὅδε 1η line 1. (U. von Wilamowitz-Moellen- dorff informs the author by letter that he reads ὁ de(tva) also in line 1 (not ὅδε), for which there is much to be said).
L. 9. προσ(τὴρέψω: the Papyrus distinctly shows προσρέψω, 1.6., the future of προσρέπω, to incline towards, intransitive: here it would be transitive, for which usage there is no authority. Hence προστρέψω ὁ would seem the preferable reading. But the question is of no importance for the sense of the concluding sentence; in either case, the adjurer threatens to use his efficacious amulet against the troubler.
1 K.g., Epiphanius, Adv. Haer., iii. 2, p. 1093 Ὁ (Dindorf, vol. iii., p. 571). See Reuvens, p. 41 ff. and Leemans, Monumens, p. 9.
2 Coll, Al., p. 67. 9 Leemans, Monwmens, Ὁ. 9.
4 Leemans, ibid., suggests προσρίψω.
958 BIBLE STUDIES. [274
The spell may accordingly be translated as follows :—
Persecute me not, thou there !—I am PAPIPETOU METU- BANES ; I carry the corpse of Osiris and I go to convey it to Abydos, to convey it to its resting-place, and to place it im the everlasting chambers. Should any one trouble me, I shall use τέ against him.
Now, differ as we may as to the meaning of the indi- vidual details of this spell, and, in particular, as to the allusions to Egyptian mythology, it is, after all, only the essential meaning which concerns us here, and this meaning the author holds to be established: the βαστάζειν of a par- ticular amulet associated with a god acts as a charm against the κόπους παρέχειν on the part of an adversary.
Starting from this point, let us now seek to understand the enigmatical words of the Apostle. One can hardly resist the impression that the obscure metaphor all at once be- comes more intelligible: Let no man venture κόπους παρέχειν for me, for in the βαστάζειν of the marks of Jesus I possess a talisman against all such things. In this way the sense of the γάρ, in particular, becomes perfectly clear. The words are not directed against the Judaisers, but to the Galatians, and, moreover, it seems probable that we must explain the threat by the same temper of mind! to which we attributed the sportive phrase about the large letters. Just as the Apostle, with kindly menace, could ask the Corinthians, Shall I come unto you with the rod ?* so here, too, he smilingly holds up his finger and says to his naughty but well-beloved children : Do be sensible, do not imagine that you can hurt me—I am protected by a charm.
We must confess that we do not feel that Paul, by this mixture of earnest and amiable jest, lays himself open to the charge of trifling. Only by a total misapprehension of
1 We would not, however, attach any special importance to this. The explanation; given above is quite justifiable, even if Paul was speaking wholly in earnest.
21 Cor. 471; see Ρ. 119 f.
275] ‘‘THE MARKS OF JESUS.” 359
the actual letter-like character of his writings as they have come down to us, could we expect that he should in them assume the severe manner of the doctor gentiwm, who, caught up into the third heaven, proclaims to mankind and to the ages what eye hath never seen. Paul is no bloodless and shadowy figure of a saint, but a man, a man of the olden time. One in whose letters utterance is found for the rap- tured glow of faith and for a sensitive and circumspect love, for bitter feelings of scorn and relentless irony—why should the winning kindliness of the jest be deemed alien to him ? He wishes to bring back the Galatians to the true way, but perhaps feels that he, in treating as τέλειοι those who are but νήπιοι, has overshot the mark. So he withdraws, though as regards the manner rather than the matter of his charges ; and who that has ever loved the Apostle could find fault ? Paul has taken care, in this passage, that his words shall have no hackneyed ring; he does not use general terms about the purposelessness of the attacks made on him, but intimates that what preserves him are the protective-marks of Jesus. Jesus guards him; Jesus restrains the troublers ; Jesus will say to them: τί αὐτῷ κόπους παρέχετε; καλὸν ἔργον ἠργάσατο ἐν ἐμοί.
We cannot, of course, go so far as to maintain that Paul makes conscious allusion to the incantation of the Papyrus; but it is not improbable that it, or one similar to it, was known to him, even were it not the case that he composed the Letter to the Galatians in the city of magicians and sorcerers. The Papyrus dates from the time of Ter- tulian; the imcantation itself may be much older.! The same Papyrus furnishes us with another incantation,? mani- festly pervaded by Jewish ideas,—another proof of the supposition that the Apostle may have been acquainted with such forms of expression. Moreover, we learn even from Christian sources that Paul on more than one
1See p. 323. 2Tt begins thus: ἐπικαλοῦμαί σε τὸν ἐν τῷ κενεᾷ πνεύματι δεινὸν ἀόρατον παντοκράτορα θεὸν θεῶν φθοροποιὸν καὶ ἐρημοποιόν (Revue égyptologique, i., p. 168).
960 BIBLE STUDIES. (276, 277
occasion came into contact with magicians,! while he him- self warns the Galatians against φαρμακεία," and reproaches them for having suffered themselves to be bewitched:? all these things but serve as evidence for the fact that the sphere, from which, haply, some light has been thrown upon the obscure phrase about the marks of Jesus, was in no wise outwith the circle of ideas in which the writer moved.’ Be it at least conceded that our contention should not be met by esthetic or religious objections. We would not maintain, of course, that the figure used by Paul can be fitted into the formulas of dogmatic Christology ; but in its context it forms a perfectly definite and forcible metaphor. And as for the possible religious objection, that Paul was not the man to apply terms originating in the darkest “heathenism” to facts distinctively Christian, it is a fair counter-plea to ask whether it is an unchristian mode of speech, at the present day, to use the verb charm ( feien) in a similar connection, or to extol the Cross as one’s Talisman. In the same manner does Paul speak of the wounds which he had received in his apostolic work—and which in 2 Cor. 410 he describes as the νέκρωσις τοῦ Incod—as the marks of Jesus, which protected him as by a charm.
4. A NOTE TO THE LITERARY HISTORY OF SECOND PETER.
Graven upon the stones of a locality where we should not expect it, we find a piece of evidence which, in any treatment of the Second Epistle of Peter, deserves the highest consideration. The beginning of this early Christian booklet has many points in common with a decree of the inhabitants of Stratonicea in Caria in honour of Zeus Pan- hemerios and of Hekate, which, dating from the early im- perial period, has been preserved in an Inscription. This Inscription has already, in our investigation of the word
1 Acts 13 and 19. 2 Gal. 5, 3 Gal. 81.
*The peculiarly emphatic ἐγώ, too, recalls the emphasis of certain incantations ; see p. 355 with reference to anok.
277, 278] A NOTE TO SECOND PETER. 361
ἀρετή, been laid under contribution,' and it will once again engage our attention.2, We begin here by giving the two texts in parallel columns, duly marking the cognate elements in each ; be it observed that it is not only the unquestion- able similarities in expression and meaning which are thus emphasised, but also certain—for the present let us call them mechanical—assonances between the two texts, the calling of attention to which will be justified as we proceed, In order to understand the Inscription, which, omitting the introductory formula, we give in the original orthography, let it be borne in mind that the infinitive σεσῶσθαι depends upon an antecedent εἰπόντος.
Decree of Stratonicea.
\ / ” - rn 12. τὴν πόλιν ἄνωθεν TH τῶν ἢ ; Deepa caaee θεῶν [προνοίᾳ Διὸς II \avnpe- 7 «ς / rn [ptov καὶ ᾿ ΕἸκάτης ἐκ πολλῶν καὶ μεγάλων καὶ συνεχῶν κιν- δύνων σεσῶσθαι, ὧν καὶ τὰ id \ Ἂν \ e / \ 4 lépa ἄσυλα καὶ ἱκέται καὶ ἡ fe \ / ἱερὰ σύνκλητος δόγματι Σε- [βαστοῦ Καίσαρος ἐπὶ] τῆς τῶν
/ Ῥ / > / » KUPLO@V @MLALMV ALWVLOU ap-



΄σ »» lal
χῆς ἐποιήσαντο προφανεῖς ἐν- ἀργείας " καλῶς δὲ ἔχι πᾶσαν
\ di \ σπουδὴν ἰσφέρεσθαι is τὴν ἢ Ἂ εἰ N > Λ) \ πρὸς [αὐτοὺς εὐσέβ]ειαν καὶ Ψ a fal μηδένα καιρὸν παραλιπῖν τοῦ
> r \ if > εὐσεβεῖν Kal λιτανεύιν αὐ-

τούς " καθίδρυται δὲ ἀγάλματα ἐν τῷ σεβαστῷῴ βουλευτηρίῳ τῶν προειρημένων θεῶν ἐπι- φαν]εστάτας παρέχοντα τῆς
θείας δυνάμεως ἀρετάς, δι᾿ ἃς

2 ΕΙΣ ὡς τὰ πάντα ἡμῖν τῆς
θείας δυνάμεως αὐτοῦ τὰ πρὸς

\ ζωὴν καὶ εὐσέβειαν δεδωρη- i a ΄ an μένης διὰ τῆς ἐπιγνώσεως TOD 7 Crliak SAS 7, \ καλέσαντος ἡμᾶς ἰδίᾳ δόξῃ καὶ Ε rs Ὑ @ , ΕΣ ἀρετῇ, δι’ ὧν τὰ τίμια ἡμῖν καὶ / ’ / , μέγιστα = eTrayyeApara δεδώ- Ae , ρηται, iva διὰ τούτων γένησθε θείας κοινωνοὶ φύσεως ἀπο- [ lal A / φυγόντες τῆς ἐν TO κόσμῳ EV > , lal | > \ ἐπιθυμίᾳ φθορᾶς, Kai αὐτὸ τοῦτο δὲ σπουδὴν πᾶσαν παρ- / i? ELTEVEYKAVTES ETLYOPNYNTATE - a \ ᾽ \ ἐν TH πίστει ὑμῶν τὴν ἀρετὴν a lal a ’ ἐν δὲ TH ἀρετῇ τὴν γνῶσιν ἐν lal , \ / δὲ TH γνώσει THY ἐγκράτειαν ’ \ a > / 7 id ἐν δὲ TH ἐγκρατείᾳ τήν ὑπο- μονὴν ἐν δὲ τῇ ὑπομονῇ τὴν » Ve 5 \ aA > εὐσέβειαν ἐν δὲ TH εὐσε- , \ Beta τὴν φιλαδελφίαν ἐν δὲ A ΄ὔ \ > ΄ τῇ φιλαδελφίᾳ τὴν ἀγάπην.
1See p. 95 ff. The Inscription is given in CIG. ii., No. 2715 a, b=
Waddington, iii. 2, Nos. 519-520 (p. 142).
ΔῸΣ 9110:
362 BIBLE STUDIES.
καὶ TO σύνπαν πλῆθος θύει τε καὶ ἐπιθυμιᾷ καὶ εὔχεται καὶ εὐχαριστεῖ -alet τοῖσ]δε τοῖς οὕτως ἐπιφανεστάτοις θεοῖς
(278, 279
Peay Κα ΘῈ: (V. 1): οὕτως γὰρ πλουσίως ἐπιχορηγηθήσεται ὑμῖν ἡ εἴσοδος εἰς τὴν αἰώνιον
if nr 7 rn \ βασιλείαν τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν καὶ

κἀκ τῆς δι᾽ ὑμνῳδίας προσόδου καὶ θρησκείας εὐσεβεῖν αὐ- τοὺς [εἴθισται}" ἔδοξετῇ βουλῇ κτλ.
σωτῆρος ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ.
Let us allow these parallels to speak for themselves, wholly ignoring the feelings of unpleasantness or, it may be, of wonder which they may wake in the breasts of some. The most important feature is manifestly this: that both texts contain the expression ἡ θεία δύναμις," and in the same case to boot. Now this is no trite expression ; its occurrence in the Inscription could not be ignored, even if there were no further point of similarity with the Epistle. But the fact that this solemn periphrasis of the term God is in both passages connected with the word ἀρετή, and further, that it occurs in an altogether peculiar and unfamiliar sense, lends a peculiar intrinsic importance to the external simi- larity. Suppose for a moment that the τῆς θείας δυνάμεως ἀρετάς of the decree occurred somewhere in the LXX; there would not, in that case, be the shadow of a doubt that the Epistle had quoted it—dismembered, it might be—or at all events had alluded to it. Nor can this analogy be set aside by the objection that the use, by the author of the Epistle, of an out-of-the-way Inscription, in a manner corre- sponding to that of biblical quotation, is inconceivable—for we have as yet said nothing as to our idea of the relation between the two texts; the objection, in any case, would be a pure petitio principii. But further: it is an especially significant, though apparently trivial, circumstance, that in both texts a relative sentence beginning with διά follows the ἀρετάς (or ἀρετῇ) ; if on other grounds it seems probable that the Inscription and the Epistle are so related that either
‘In 2 Pet. 15 the genitive τῆς θείας δυνάμεως is of course the subject of the middle verb δεδωρημένης.
279, 280] A NOTE TO SECOND PETER. 363:
presupposes a knowledge of the other, then we should have here the recurrence of a phenomenon often observed in parallel or internally-dependent texts, viz., that consciously or unconsciously the dependent text has been so framed, by means of a slight alteration,’ as to obliterate the traces of its. origin.
We are of opinion that the parallels already indicated are sufficiently evident. Should further instances be made out, these will naturally gain a much stronger evidential value from their connection with what has been already pointed out. There is nothing remarkable in the mere fact that the Inscription contains this or that word which occurs in the Epistle. But what is significant, is that the same definite number of what are, in part, very characteristic expressions, is found in each of the two texts; and it is this which renders improbable the hypothesis of mere accident. Little value as we would place upon individual cases of similarity, yet in their totality these strike us as very forcible. Hence the connection also brings out the full importance of the parallels ἡ αἰώνιος βασιλεία τοῦ κυρίου and ἡ τῶν Kupioy αἰώνιος ἀρχή, an importance which appears still more decided, when we compare these parallels with, e.g., those (by no means so striking) given by H. von Soden? in connection with the Epistle ad loc., viz., Heb. 12% βασιλεία ἀσάλευτος, and 2 Tim. 418 βασιλεία ἐπουράνιος. In both of these passages the only real parallel is the word βασιλεία; but it was surely unnecessary to seek references for that.2 The outstanding feature of the phrase in the Epistle is the term αἰώνιος, applied to kingdom ; * hence, even if the Inscription joins this term with what is only a synonym of βασιλεία, the force of
1 Note that the cases following διά are different.
ΘΕΙ͂Ο ii. 27 (1892), p. 199.
3 A real biblical parallel is LXX Dan. 3*.
4 αἰώνιος, of which the Inscriptions contain many examples, is, in titles. and solemn forms of expression, nearly similar in meaning to the Latin perpetwus ; ἀΐδιος, in similar connections, appears to be a synonym. Refer- ences in Bull. de corr, hell., xii. (1888), p, 196f, Hence, when we find the word in the Bible, we should not allow the presuppositions concerning an alleged biblical Greek to induce us to interpret it mechanically in every case,
964 BIBLE STUDIES. [280, 281
our parallel is in no way lessened. Observe, moreover, κυρίων || κυρίου. Then, again, the likeness of πᾶσαν σπουδὴν εἰσφέρεσθαι in the Inscription to σπουδὴν πᾶσαν παρεισενέγ- καντες in the Kpistle, cannot fail to strike the eye. Even at some risk of repetition, we cannot help remarking that this expression would not of itself prove anything, for it is com- mon in later Greek. It is only by a false method of pro- cedure that M. Krenkel! reckons it among the assonances which are thought to prove an alleged indebtedness to Josephus on the part of the author of the Second Epistle of Peter. Butin the present case the phrase, connected as it is with the other parallels, has a force at least equivalent to that ascribed to the shorter σπουδὴν πᾶσαν 2 in connection with our Epistle’s numerous unquestionable plagiarisms from the Epistle of Jude.*? The same will hold good, with more or less force, of the εὐσέβεια. The statistics of the word in the biblical writngs—if we may, for once, isolate the concept ‘ biblical Greek ”—are very remarkable. Relatively seldom,* on the whole, as it occurs there, it is yet quite frequently found in the Pastoral Epistles and the Second HKpistle of Peter; while the Acts of the Apostles also uses εὐσέβεια, εὐσεβεῖν and εὐσεβής" Now these words occur frequently in the Inscriptions of Asia Minor: they appear to have been familiar terms in the religious language of the imperial period.
The more external resemblances between the two texts have also been indicated; for, if the hypothesis of relation- ship be valid, they cannot but prove to be of interest. In connection with this very Epistle of Peter it has been demonstrated that the writer of it not seldom depends upon his assiduously-used model, the Epistle of Jude, in quite an
! Josephus und Lukas, Leipzig, 1894, p. 350, Krenkel refers to Jose- phus, Antt. xx, 92; a more acute glance into Wetstein would have made him more cautious,
2 Cf. Jude ®, 3 See e.g., Jiilicher, Himleitung in das N.T., p. 151.
+The same may be said of the adjective and the verb. The “ Fourth Book of Maccabees”? forms an exception.
5 These words are not found elsewhere in the New Testament.
981, 282] A NOTE TO SECOND PETER. 365
external way. ‘‘ Some peculiar expression, the purpose of which is made plain only by the context in Jude, is retained, or an expression is fabricated from reminiscences of the purely local connection in that book. In 2 Pet. 2", the leading word συνευωχούμενοι is taken from Jude ν. 12, and yet its concrete relationship to the love-feasts has been allowed to fall out, so that it is only the sound of the words which influences the choice of the essentially different expressions (ἀπάταις instead of ἀγάπαις, σπίλοι instead of σπιλάδες)." 3 Now, precisely as in regard to the formal assonances in the very instructive example just given, viz. :—
Jude v.12: 2 ene 2: G aes | 3 A Lay ᾿ 3 \ a ᾽ οὗτοί εἰσιν οἱ ἐν ταῖς ἀγά- σπίλοι ὃ καὶ μῶμοι ἐντρυ- c lal , it Ws Lal ἴω TALS ὑμῶν σπιλάδες, συνευω- φῶντες ἐν ταῖς ἀπάταις av- ΄ > / a al χούμενοι ἀφόβως τῶν συνευωχούμενοι ὑμῖν,
so might we perhaps judge of the instance ἀγάλματα--- ἐπαγγέλματα in the Decree and the Epistle respectively— although the author would advance the point with all due reserve. Shall we count it more probable that the ἐπιθυμία of the one text has exercised an outward influence on the syntactically and lexically different ἐπεθυμια of the other ? Once more, the use of the superlative μέγιστος in both pass- ages cannot be ignored,—though, at first sight, such a state- ment may seem strange ; but its cogency will be more readily perceived when it is remembered that the superlative of μέγας occurs nowhere else in “‘the’’ New Testament.’
1(But see Revisers’ text.—TR. ]. 2B. Weiss, Lehrbuch der Hinleitung in das N.T., Berlin, 1886, p. 439. 3 For the accentuation see Winer-Schmiedel, § 6, 3 ὁ (p. 68).
4 Further, in the whole range of ‘ biblical” Greek (apart from 2nd, 3rd and 4th Maccabees), μέγιστος occurs elsewhere (if we may depend upon Tromm) only in Job 262 and 81 38; moreover, the Alexandrinus reads μεγάλη for μεγίστη in the latter passage. μέγιστος seems to be very rare also in the Papyri of the Ptolemaic period. According to the indexes we have only the idiomatic phrase ὃ ἐμοὶ μέγιστον ἔσται, in Pap. Flind. Petr., ii., xiii. (19), ca. 255 8.0. (Mahaffy, ii. [45]), and τῆς μεγίστης θεᾶς Ἥρας, Pap. Par., 15, 120 B.c. (Notices, xviii. 2, p. 219), as a solemn designation, most probably a fixed form of expression, similar to that in our Inscription.
966 BIBLE STUDIES, [282, 283
Is it possible to hold that the similarities in the two texts are merely accidental? We have again and again pondered this question, but have always come to the con- clusion that it must be answered in the negative. Doubt- less, the deciding of such questions always implies a certain inner susceptibility, and is thus subjective. But here, as we judge, there are objective grounds to proceed upon. We would endeavour, therefore, to define more precisely the very general impression made by the two texts, by saying that they must be inter-related in some way.
Now the Decree of Stratonicea is undoubtedly older . than the Second Epistle of Peter. From its contents, we might infer its date to be previous to 22 4.p.; from its form, somewhat later. But even if the Inscription were of later date than the Hpistle, it would be an improbable hypothesis that the former was in its contents dependent upon the latter. The dependence must rather be, if the relationship is granted, on the side of the Epistle. Hence the general statement made above may be specialised thus far: the beginning of the Second Epistle of Peter must be in some way dependent upon forms of expression occurring in the Decree of Stratonicea.
We speak of the forms of expression of the Decree. For it is not urgently necessary to assert a dependence upon the Decree itself. Of course, it is certainly possible that the writer of the Epistle may have read the Inscrip- tion. Assuredly Paul is not the only Christian of the century of the New Testament who read ‘“‘ heathen” inscrip- tions, and reflected thereon. The inscriptions, official and private, found in the streets and market-places, in temples and upon tombs, would be the only reading of the great majority of people who could read. Of what we call classical literature, the greater number would hardly ever read any- thing at all. The heads of the Christian brotherhoods who were versed in literature were influenced, in respect of their range both of words and thoughts, by their sacred books, but manifestly also by the forms of expression common in their locality. The present writer would count the expressions
288, 284] A NOTE TO SECOND PETER. 367
before us, found in the Inscription of Stratonicea, as belong- ing to the solemn forms of the official liturgical language of Asia Minor. From the nature of the case it seems certain that they were not used for the first time in this Decree in honour of Zeus Panhemerios and Hekate. Conceivable though it be that the author of the Second Epistle of Peter had adopted them directly from the Carian Inseription,! yet we would confine ourselves to the more cautious conjecture that the author of the Epistle, hike the author of the Decree before him, simply availed himself of the familiar forms and formule of religious emotion.” The mosaic-like character of the writer’s work, specially evident in his relation to the Hpistle of Jude, is illustrated once more by the facts just adduced.
Should our conjecture hold good—particularly, of course, if a direct dependence upon the Decree of Stratonicea could be made probable—we should have a new factor for the solution of the problem as to the origin of the Epistle. Certainly the hypothesis of an Egyptian origin, which has gained great favour in recent years, is not confirmed by the local colouring, which belongs to Asia Minor; we would, however, refrain meanwhile from categorically asserting that it originated in Asia Minor,’ as we have not yet mastered
1 The above-discussed series of purely formal assonances might be put forward as supporting this.
* How such formule were used, spontaneously, so to speak, in the writings of other representatives of the new Faith, may be seen, e.g., in the relationship between certain Pauline passages and the solemn words made known to us by an Inscription of Halicarnassus of the early imperial period : see C. T. Newton, A History of Discoveries at Halicarnassus, Cnidus and Branchidae, ii. 2, London, 1863, p. 695.—Cf. also W. M. Ramsay, The Greek of the Early Church and the Pagan Ritual, in the Expository Times, vol. x., p. 9 ff.—A similar instance from ancient times has been noted by R. Kittel in ZAW. xviii. (1898), p. 149 ff.: Isaiah 4514. shows dependence upon the court- phraseology made known to us by the clay-cylinders of Cyrus.
3 The theory becomes still more probable when we compare the above conjecture with what Th. Zahn, Geschichte des Neutestamentl. Kanons, i. 1, Erlangen, 1888, p. 312 ff., says about the locality in which the Espistle ‘‘ was first circulated, and gained the esteem ot the church’’; but see A. Harnack, Das N.T. um das Jahr 200, Freiburg i. B., 1889, p. 85f.
368 ; BIBLE STUDIES. [284, 285
the lexical relations of the Epistle. It would at least be necessary to inquire how far its peculiar vocabulary has points of contact with that of literary sources (of the im- perial period) from Egypt,’ or Asia Minor,? including those of the Papyri and the Inscriptions.
5. WHITE ROBES AND PALMS.
‘After these things I saw, and behold, a great multi- tude, which no man could number, out of every nation, and of all tribes and peoples and tongues, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, arrayed in white robes, and palms in their hands; and they cry with a great voice, saying, Salvation unto our God which sitteth on the throne, and unto the Lamb.” So does the early Christian seer depict those who have been made perfect, who have come out of the great tribulation, and now serve God day and night in His temple. Few Bible passages have taken such hold of the everyday Christian consciousness, few have been inscribed so hopefully on the impassive tombstone, as these chaste verses from the mysterious final pages of the Holy Book. So deeply have they entered into the sphere of religious ideas, that, generally speaking, we are not struck by the thought, how eloquent of ancient days is the colour- ing of the artist who created the picture. The inner beauty of the thought keeps in abeyance any impression which its form might suggest; the captivated spirit even
1 Of course, such expressions as may probably seem to be derived from the Alexandrian translation of the O.T. would not prove anything regarding the hypothetical Egyptian origin of the Epistle.
*So far as we are able, from a general knowledge of a portion of the Inscriptions of Asia Minor, to judge, the lexical relations of the Epistle do, indeed, point to Asia Minor or Syria. He gives but one example here, which he would likewise attribute to the fixed phraseology of solemn speech. In 2 Pet. 14 we find the peculiar phrase, iva. . γένησθε θείας κοινωνοὶ φύσεως ; with this compare a passage from a religious Inscription of King Antiochus I. of Kommagene (middle of 1st cent. B.c.; discovered at Selik), viz., πᾶσιν ὅσοι φύσεως κοινωνοῦντες ἀνθρω[πί]νης (in Humann and Puchstein’s Reisen in Klein- asien und Nordsyrien, Textband, p. 371). The resemblance had already struck the editors of the Inscription. The Kommagenian Inscriptions, moreover, afford other materials for the history of the language of early Christianity.

285, 986] WHITE ROBES AND PALMS. 369
of the modern man readily and unconstrainedly accepts the unaccustomed scenery, which yet has its proper place only under the eternal blue of the eastern sky, or in the serene halls of an ancient temple. The pious Christian of the times of decadence did not depict things to come in the forms of the pitiful present; he saw them rather in the crystal mirror of the authoritative past.
The exegetes of Rev. 7°" have striven, in widely diver- gent ways, to explain the peculiar colouring of this celestial scenery. How does it come about that the adornment of the blessed choir of the saints before the throne of God should be portrayed exactly as it is? The explanation of the individual elements provides no difficulty.!. The white robes, of course, according to the bold symbolism of the text itself, are connected with the cleansing power of the blood of the Lamb (v. 4); and, even without this special reference, they have already a distinct and well-known sense (see 6"). Again, the expression palms in their hands 15. familiar to the reader of the Bible as a sign of festive joy. Attempts have been made to supply a more definite background for this latter feature, now from Jewish, now from Hellenic, ideas. On the one hand, the palms have been looked upon as suggesting a comparison of the heavenly glory with the Feast of Tabernacles; on the other, they have been taken as an allusion to the palm-twigs bestowed upon the victor in the Greek games.
We would not deny that such explanations, so far as concerns the details of a picture which is not after all so difficult to grasp, are quite adequate. But they do not elucidate the scene in its entirety. How did the writer come to bring together precisely these two features ? And how comes it that both are assigned to the chow of the blessed, which, in alternate song with the angels, raises a hallelujah to the Most High? If we knew of no historical circumstance which might suggest an answer to these questions, we might naturally enough infer that the writer of the Apocalypse had himself composed his picture from
1 For what follows cf. F. Diisterdieck, Meyer, xvi. + (1887), p. 289. 24
370 BIBLE STUDIES. [286, 287
diverse elements. But we are of opinion that there are good grounds for the supposition that the portrayer of the πανήγυρις ἐπουράνιος had availed himself of the scenery of a religious ceremony with which he was familiar.
In the Inscription of Stratonicea in Caria (already mentioned several times), belonging to the beginning of the imperial period,! the inhabitants of the city, out of gratitude to Zeus Panhemerios and Hekate, resolve that, in honour of these deities, thirty boys of noble parentage, under the leadership of the παιδονόμος and the παιδοφύλακες, shall daily sing a prescribed hymnus in the bouleuterion—clothed in white and crowned with a twig, likewise holding a twig in their hands. This custom would hardly be maugurated by the piety of the people of Stratonicea; such choirs of sacred singers, similarly accoutred, were, without doubt, also to be seen elsewhere in the Greek districts of Asia Minor.
Here, then, in all probability, we have the model by which the writer of the Apocalypse was consciously or un- consciously guided ; and those belonging to Asia Minor who read his book—a book full of the local colour of that region —would grasp his imagery with special facility. What they beheld in heaven was something that had, by association with their native soil, become familiar and dear to them— a choir of pious singers in festive attire; and if they had an ear to hear what the Spirit said to the churches, they could also, of course, surmise that in this instance what came from holy lips was a new song.
1See pp. 96f. and 360ff. The passage runs: ... λευχιμονοῦντας kal ἐστεφανωμένους θαλλοῦ ἔχοντας“ δὲ μετὰ χῖρας [for this construction of μετά, which is found elsewhere in the idiom μετὰ χεῖρας ἔχειν (W. Schmid, Der Atticismus, iii., p. 285), cf. the variant of LXX Gen. 437), τίς ἐνέβαλεν ἡμῖν μετὰ χεῖρας τὸ ἀργύριον, Codd. 31 and 83, Field, i., p. 61] ὁμοίως θαλλοὺς οἵτινες συνπαρόν των κα]ὶ κιθαριστοῦ καὶ κήρυκος ἄσονται ὕμνον. The original orthography has been retained. On the fact cf. the remark of the scholiast upon Theocr. Jd. ii. 12, quoted by the editor, Waddington, iii. 2, p. 143: οἱ παλαιοὶ τὴν Ἑκάτην τρίμορφον ἔγραφον χρυσεοσάνδαλον kal λευχείμονα καὶ μήκωνας ταῖν χεροῖν ἔχουσαν kal λαμπάδας ἡμμένας.
THE END.
ay
Ε
INDEX OF GREEK WORDS AND PHRASHS.
a interchanging with e, 182.
-a, -as in imperf., 191.
Ἄβαωθ, 281.
᾿Αβδεναγώ, 310.
᾿Αβέλβαλος, 325.
ABeABeA, 325.
ἼΑβιδος, 357.
᾿Αβραάμ, 187.
᾿Αβραάμιος, 187.
Αβρααν, 281.
Αβραθιαβρι, 334.
ἼΔβραμος, 187.
Αβρατιαωθ, 327.
ἀγάπη, 198 fe
ἀγγαρεύω, 86 f., 182.
ἄγγαρος, 86 ἢ
ἀγρυπνέω ἐπί, 288.
ἄγω, 190.
ἀδελφός, 87 f., 142.
ἄδολος, 256.
ἄδυτον, 287.
An [2], 326.
ἀθάνατος, 293.
els ἀθέτησιν, 228 f.
εἰς ἀθέτησιν καὶ ἀκύρωσιν, 228 f.
ἀθέτησις, 228 f.
Aia, 322, 325, 326.
ἀΐδιος, 363.
αἴθριον, 99.
αἴρω » 93.
αἰώνιος, 289, 969.
ἢ αἰώνιος ἀρχή, 363.
ἢ αἰώνιος βασιλεία, 363.
ἀκατάγνωστος, 200.
᾿Ακύλας, -α, 187.
᾿Ακύλας, -ου, 187.
᾿Ακύλλας, 187.
adaBapxns, 184.
ἀλαβών, 183 f.
ἀλλοτριοεπίσκοπος, 224.
adxas, 357.
ἅμα σύν, 64.
ἁμαρτία, 225.
ἁμαρτίαν ὀφείλω, 225.
Αμβριθηρα, 327.
Αμβριθιαωθ, 327.
ἀμετανόητος, 257.
-ay for -ασι, 192.
ἄν supplanted by ἐάν, 202f.
ava, 139 f.
ἀνὰ εἷς ἕκαστος, 139 f. ᾿ἀναγέγραπται, 249 f. ἀναπέμπω, 229,
| ἀναστρέφομαι, 88, 194. avactpopn, 194. ἀναφαλαντίασις, 88. ἀναφάλαντος, 88.
] ἀναφαλάντωμα, 88. ἀναφέρω, 88 ie
ἀναφέρω τὰς ἁμαρτίας, 88 f. ἀναφέρω τὰ ὀφειλήματα, 90, ] ἀνδιδοῦντα, 192. ἀνδραλογία [2], 219. ἀνδραφονέω, 220. ἀνδρολογεῖον, 220. ἀνδρολογία, 219 f.
ἄνεμοι, 248.
ἀνοίγω, 189.
avox, 395.
ἀντιλήμπτωρ, 91. ἀντίλημψις, 92, 223. ᾿Αντίπα[τρο Ἰς, 187.
ἀξίωμα, 92 f.
ἀξίως τοῦ Θεοῦ, 248, ἀπερίτμητος, 153.
| ἀπέχω, 229.
amd, 196, 216, 227.
᾿ ἀπὸ τοῦ βελτίστου, 93.
ἀπὸ τοῦ νῦν, 253. ᾿ἀποδιδέτω, 192.
ἀπόκριμα, 257. ᾿Απολλινάριος, 309. ᾿Απολλώνιος, 149.
ἀποχή, 229.
apaBipxns, 184.
| ἀραβών, 183 f
| ApBabiaw, 324. / ApBabiaw8, BYTE
| ᾿Αρέθας, 183 f. 4 ἀρεσκεία, 224. / ᾿ἀρεταλογία, 93 Ff. ,, asteed haan ae / ἀρεταλόγος, 96 ti » ᾿Αρέτας, 183 i” ἀρετή, 95 f.,
ἀρκετός, ost
ἅρπαγμα, 291.
ἁρπάζω, 19
ἀρραβών, 108 f. (37


βεβαίω“"-
| οἱ ἄρτοι οἱ ἐνώπιοι, 157.
οἱ ἄρτοι τῆς προθέσεως, 157. οἱ ἄρτοι τοῦ προσώπου, 157. ἀρχή, 267. ἀρχισοματοφύλα!, 98.
τας, 188 f.
ἄσημος, 153.
-ασι for -ay, 192.
᾿Ασιδαῖοι, 68.
ἀσπάζομαι, 257. ᾿Ασταρτιεῖον, 160. ᾿᾿Αταβύριον, 332.
| ἄφεσις, 98 f.
ἀχρεῖοι δοῦλοι, 68.
Aw@, 281, 288.
Βαθιαβηλ, 334.
Βαλιαβα, 334.
Βαριησοῦ, 163.
Bapva, 188.
Βαρνάβας [1], 310.
Βαρναβᾶς, 187 f., 307.
BapvaBy [1], ae
Βαρναβι [1], 3
eens s Τὴ 187 f., 309 f.
Bapvas [?], 188.
BapyeBous, 188, 309.
Baprapas, 189.
βασιλεία ἀσάλευτος, 363.
βασιλεία ἐπουράνιος, 363.
βαστάζω, 102 f., 191, 257, 354 f., 358.
βέβαιος, 107, 109.
βεβαιόω, 108 f., 230.
eis βεβαίωσιν, 2
Biapet, f ; τὸ δοκιμ 281. τὸ δοκιμεαὶ φοβε- τὸ δοκί 2 f. “οκίμιο.ς, 140 f., ο δόκιμος » Aopkas3.
δῇ δυεῖν, 1197 f.
δύναμις, 197 f. ἣ Ouvap
μένη 202, 204. δύνομα
ναμα δύο, 18102, δυσί, 1
372
γένημα, 109 f., 184. γενηματογραφέω, 184. γεννάω, 184. γεννηθείς, 184. γέννημα, 184. γενόμενος, 191. γίνομαι, 184, 191, 192. τὸ γνήσιον, 250. γογγύζω, 110. γράμματα στικτά, 9501. γραμματεύς, 106 f. γραμματεὺς τῶν δυνάμεων,
γραμματεὺς τῶν μαχίμων, 110.
γραμματικός, 112. κατὰ τὰς γραφάς, 250. γραφή, 112 f.
κατὰ τὴν γραφήν, 250. γράφω, 112 f., 249 f.
Ἂ: Dive δαιμόνιον πνεῦμα, 281. Δαλματία, 182. δαλματική, 182. δέδωκες, 192. δέησιν, δεήσεις
250. Δελματία, 182. δελματική, 182. δεξιὰν δίδωμι, 251. ——s δίδωμι, 251. δεξιὰν λαμβάνειν, 251. ς λαμβάνειν, 251. Δερματία, 182. δια, 289. διὰ φωνῆς, 289. διαγέγραπται, 250. διαδεχόμενος, 115. διάδοχος, 110, 118. διακούω, 230. διαχωρίζω, 284. δίδι, 192. διδοῦντες, 192. διδόω, 192. δίδω, 192. διδῶ, 192. δίδωμι, 192. διετία, 258. εἰς τὸ διηνεκές, 251. δίκαιος, 115 f. dioetfan 286. 1iL., P- toy, 259 f. ἀργύριοιτον, 259 f. καὶὶ Ki€4lov (t) 259 f.
5) 200). retain’ , 260 f. quotes Ca ἔγραφε" 110 f ἡμμένοι,ς τοῦ Θεοῦ ἡ καλου- μεγάλη, 336.
1 and δύνω, for δύ- ι; 193.
ποιοῦμαι,

Ο τὰ
37.
δύω (numeral), 187. δυῶν, 187.
ε, ἘΠ ΒΡ hange of, with a, 182.
ἐάν, 201 ἢ.
ἐάν with indicative, 201 f.
ἐάν for ἄν, 175, 202,
ἐβάσταζαν, 191.
ἐγγαρεύω, 182.
ἐγενάμην, 191.
ἔγραψες, 192.
ἐγώ εἰμι, 355, 360.
ἐδείδι, 192.
ἔθος, 251.
κατὰ τὸ ἔθος, 251.
εἶ μάν, 208.
εἰ μή, 206.
εἰ μή τι ἄν, 204.
εἶ (εἰ ἢ μήν, 205 f.
εἰ μήν, 206.
-eia, 181 f.
εἰδάλλομαι, 291 f.
Εἰμαλκουαί, 52 ΙΕ
εἰπόσει, 201.
εἴρηκες, 192.
eis, 117 f., 194 f., 197.
eis βεβαίωσιν, 105 f.
els TO ὄνομά τινος, 146 f.
εἷς ἕκαστος, 139.
εἷς καθ᾽ εἷς, 188 f.
εἷς καθ᾽ ἕκαστος, 198 f.
ἐκ τῶν τεσσάρων ἀνέμων, 248.
ἐκβράζω, 290.
ἔκγονα τῆς ζωγραφίας, 165.
ἔκγονος τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ, 165.
ἐκλικμάω, 220.
ἐκτένεια, 262.
ἐκτενῶς, 262.
ἐκτὸς εἰ μή, 118.
ἔκτρομος, 290.
ἔλαβα, 191.
ἐλαιών, 208 f.
ἔλεγας, 191.
ἔλειψα, 190.
ἐμμένω (ev) πᾶσι τοῖς γε- γραμμένοις, 248 f.
ev, 76, 118 f., 197, 284.
ἐν ὀνόματί τινος, 147.
ἐν ῥάβδῳ, 120.
ἐν τῇ ῥαβδῳ, 120, 284.
ἐνγαρία, 182.
ἐνταφιαστής. 120 f.
ἔντευξις, 121, 146.
ἔντρομος, 290.
ἐντυγχάνω, 121.
ἐντυχία, 121.
νῴδιον, 150.
νώπιον, 213 f.
νώτιον, 150.
ξέδετο, 192.
ἐξέλαβα, 191.
ἐξιλάσκομαι, 225.
ἐξιλάσκομαι ἁμαρτίαν, 225.
ἐξιλασμός, 127.
ἐπαιώνιος, 283.
νυ Me Me Me MN

INDEX OF GREEK WORDS AND PHRASES.
ἐπῆλθα, 191.
ἐπήλθασι, 192. ἐπήλθοσαν, 191.
ἐπί, 197, 339 f.
6 ἐπὶ τῶν πραγμάτων, 306 f. ὁ ἐπὶ τῶν χρημάτων, 307. τὸ ἐπιβάλλον μέρος, 250. ἐπιγένησις, 185. ἐπιγέννησις, 185. ἐπιδίδω, 192.
ἐπίθεμα, 125.
ἐπιθυμέω τινά, 293. ἐπιθυμητής, 224. ἐπικαλούμενος, ὃ, 210. ἐπικεκλημένος, 6, 210. ἐπιούσιος, 214. ἐπίσκοποι, 230 f. ἐπίσκοπος, 156, 230 f. ἐπιστολὰς συντάσσειν, 3. ἐπιτέτευχα, 190. ἐργοδιώκτης, 122. ἐργοπαρέκτης, 122. ἔρχομαι, 191.
ἐρωτάω, 195, 290.
-es for -as, 192.
ἔσθησις, 263.
éoxa, 191.
ἑτοίμως ἔχω, 252. εὐάρεστος. 214 f. εὐαρέστως, 214 f. evidatos, 122, 258. εὐσέβεια, 564.
εὐσεβέω, 364.
εὐσεβής, 364. εὐχαριστέω, 122. ἐφόπτης. 293.
ἔχω, 191, 298.
ἕως εἷς πάντες, 139.
ἕως πάντες, 199.
¢, interchanging with o, 185. Ζαβυθ, 331.
ZeBaw, 332.
Ζεβυθ, 330 f.
Cuvpva, 185.
Ζμύρνα, 185.
Ζμυρναῖος, 185.
ἦ μήν, 206 ἢ
ἤδη ἤδη ταχὺ ταχύ, 289. ἦλθα, 191.
ἡμίονος, 285. ἥμισος, 186. ἡμίσους (gen.), 186. qvotyny, 189 ἠνύγη, 189.
jéa, 190.
ἤρηχες, 192. ἡρπάγην, 190.
θαβαωθ, 333.
@apa, 189.
@appa, 189.
7) θεία δύναμις, 362. θεῖος, 218.
θεολόγος, 231 f.
τὰ θεμέλια τῆς γῆς, 287.
INDEX OF
τὸ θεμέλιον, 123.
θεός, 167, 228.
τοῦ θεοῦ θέλοντος, ete. , 252. | Θεόφιλος, 336.
θρόνος τῆς χάριτος, 135. κατὰ θυγατροποιΐαν, 239.
GREEK WORDS
Ἴσακος, 189, 282. Ισραμα, 282. ἱστός, 135. Ἰταβύριον, 332. ἸἸωάνης, 184. ᾿Ιωνάθας, 149.
AND PHRASES. 373 | Aovw, 226 f.
| Aovw ἀπό, 227. | Μαναήμ, 310 f.
Mavany, 310 f. μαρτυροῦμαι, 265.

Θωθ, 288, 325.
1 as a consonant, 326. Ber 182. ἢ
τία for -eia, 181 f. Ta, 322, 324.
᾿Ιὰ οὐαί, 321.
"Id οὐέ, 321. TaBa, 325, 333. IaBas, 334. Ιαβαωθ, 334. IaBe, 322, 330 f. Ιαβεζεβυθ, 330 f. IaBns [1], 334. IaBoe, 333. IaBovyn, 354. Ιαβουχ, 334. Ιαβω, 334. Ιαβωχ, 334.
lan, 322, 325 f. Ιαηλ, 325. Ιακκωβι, 282. Ιακου, 282. Ιακουβ, 282, 324. ᾿Ιακώβ. 316. Ἰάκωβος, 316. Ιαοαι, 324.
Tao@, 322, 326. *Iaov, 321, 322. *Iaove, 321, 322, 327 ἢ Ιαπως, 354. Ἰάσων, 315.
law, 282, 322, 324. law Ia, 322, 325. Ιαωαι, 324.
Ιαωθ, 327.
Ιαωλ, 325.
Ιαων, 324. Iawove, 328. Iawoven, 328.
Iawoune, 327, 328, 329.
lawount, 327, 329. Ιαωτ, 327. ἰδάλλομαι, 291 ἢ, ἴδιος, 123 f. IEHQOYA, 329. tex =i, 182 f. ἱερατεύω, 215 f. Ἱεροσόλυμα, 316. ᾿Ιερουσαλήμ, 316. ἱλάσκομαι, 224 f.
ἱλάσκομαι ἁμαρτίας, 224 f.
ἱλαστήριον, 124 f.
ἱλαστήριον ἐπίθεμα, 125.
ἱλαστήριος, 124 f. tAn [2], 326. Ἰμαλκουέ, 321. ἰνδάλλομαι, 291 f. ἴνδαλμα, 292. Ἴσαακ, 189. Ἴσακ, 189.
καθαρίζω, 216.
καθαρίζω ἀπό, 216.
καθαρὸς ἀπό τινος, 190, 221. καθὼς γέγραπται, etc., 249 f.
kat placed between prepo-
sition and noun, 64, 265. 6 καὶ, 309, 313 ff. καινίζω, 290. 6 καθ᾽ eis, 138 1. καθολικός, 50 f. κακοπάθεια, 263 f. κακοπαθία, 263 f. καλείψῃ, 192. καλούμενος, 6, 210. καρπὸν σφραγίζομαι, 238 f. καρπόω, 135 t. κάρπωμα 138. κάρπωσις, 138. κατά, 138 f. κατὰ πρόσωπόν τινος, 140.
| κατάκριμα, 264 f.
κατέλειψα, 190.
κατῆξα. 190.
κινύρα, 332.
Κλεοπᾶς, 315.
KAcogas, 315.
Κλωπαϊ- 1], 315.
Κλωπᾶς [1], 315.
κοινωνέω φύσεως ἀνθρωπί- νη5, 368.
κοινωνὸς θείας φύσεως, 368.
κουστουδία, 08.
κουστωδία, θ8.
κτηματώνης, 147.
ἣ κυριακή (ἡμέρα), 218 f.
κυριακός, 175, 217 f.
κύριος, 219.
ὁ κύριος, 219.
| ὃ κύριος ἡμῶν, 89 f., 219.
κύριος τῶν πνευμάτων. 527. Κῦρος, 332.
κωμάζω, 237.
κωστουδία, 68
κωστωδία, 68.
λαμβάνω, 191. λεγιών, 209. λεγόμενος, ὃ, 210. λέγω, 191.
| λείπω, 190. λειτουργέω, 140 f.
| λειτουργία, 140 f., 144. ᾿λειτουργικός, 141. λειτουργός, 140 ἢ. λικμάω, 225 f.
λίψ, 141 f.
| Aovyela, 142 f., 219 ἢ, λογεύω, 143.

| λογία [1], 142 f., 219 ἢ, | τοῦ λοιποῦ, 349.
| uaxw, 201. ᾿μέγιστος, 365. | μειζότερος, 144.
ἐκ τοῦ μέσου αἴρω, 252.
| μετὰ καί, 64, 265.
| μετὰ χεῖρας ἔχω, 370.
| μεταδίδωμι ἐνώπιον, 213. ᾿μετεπιγέγραφαν, 192.
| μέτοικος, 228. μετουβανες, 355.
6 μικρός, 144 f. μισθαποχῆή, 229. ᾿μισοπονηρέω, 293. μισοπονηρία, 293. μισοπόνηρος, 293. ᾿μύρρα, 332.
Ναβη, 308.
Ναβι, 308. Ναβοκοδρόσορος, 309. NaBov(apday, 310. Ναβουχοδονοσορ, 309. NaBovxodovdcopos, 309. Ναβώ, 309.
Navn, 308.
NeBous, 309.
νεκρία, 142.
νέκρωσις Tov Incov, 360. vedputos, 220.
νόημα, 13.
νόμιζμα, 185.
νομός, 145.
ξενολογία, 220.
oides, 192.
οἰκεῖος, 123.
οἰκονομία, 246.
᾿ὅὁλοκαρπόω, 138.
ὁλοκάρπωμα, 138.
ὁλοκάρπωσις, 138.
| ὁλοκαύτωμα, 138.
| dAokavTwors, 138.
| ὁμολογία, 249.
κατ᾽ ὄναρ, 253.
κατ᾽ ὄνειρον, 253.
ὄνομα, 146 f., 196 f.
τὸ ὄνομα τὸ ἅγιον, 281.
τὸ ὄνομα ἔντιμον καὶ φοβε- ρὸν καὶ μέγα, 282 f.
εἰς τὸ ὄνομά τινος, 140 f.,
᾿ς 1901 Ui
| bvoua φρικτόν, 288.
᾿τῷ ὀνόματί τινος, 197 t.
ἐν τῷ ὀνόματί τινος, 197 ἴ.
ἐπ᾽ ὀνόματος, 197.
ὁπόταν with indic. , 202, 204.
ὁρκίζω τινά, 281.
ὅσιοι ᾿Ιουδαῖοι, 68.
ὅταν with indic., 202.
Οὐρβανός, 283.


914
-ovs, 188.
ὀφειλή, 221.
ὀφείλω, 191.
ὀφείλω ἁμαρτίαν, 225. ὀφίλατε, 191.
ὄφιλεν, 191.
ὀψώνιον, 148, 266. ὀψώνιον λαμβάνω, 266.
aw for Ἃ (9), 189. (παδώσω), 192. παντεπόπτης», 293. παντεφόπτης, 293. παντοκράτωρ, 288. παπιπετου, ὅ00. παραγενάμενος, 191: παράδεισος, 148 f. παράδετε, 192. παραίτιος ἀγαθῶν, 253. παρακατατίθομαι, 193. παράκλησις, 308. παραλογεία, 143. παραλογεύω, 148. παρεπιδημέω, 149. παρεπίδημος, 149. πάρεσι-, 266. παρέχομωι ἑμαυτόν, 254. παρίστημι θυσίαν, 254. πάροικος. 227 f. Tlaptapas, 188 f. παστοφορίον, 149 f. mat potapadotos, 266. Παῦλος, 316.
πεῖν, 182 f. περιδέξιον, 150.
τὰ περίεργα, 323. περιεργάζομαι, 323. περιεργία, 323. περιπατεῖν ἀξίως, 194. περίστασις, 10. περιτέμνω, 151 f. περιτομή, 152.
ἀπὸ πέρυσι, 221. πῆχυς, 153 f.
πῖν, 183.
πίνω, 182 f.
πίστις, 79.
πλῆθος, 232 f. πλήρωμα, 110. ποτισμός, 154, πρᾶγμα, 233.
πρᾶγμα ἔχω πρός τινα, 258. πράκτωρ, 154,
πρᾶξις, 323.
πρεσβύτεροι, οἱ, 154 f., 288.
πρεσβύτεροι ἱερεῖς, 154 f., 289 f.
πρεσβύτερος, 104 f., 233 f.
πρεσβυτικόν, 166.
κατ τὰ προγεγραμμένα,
προγέγραπται, 250.
προεγαμοῦσαν, 191.
πρόθεσις, 157.
πρόθεσις ἄρτων, 157.
μετὰ πάσης προθυμίας, 254.
προσευχή, 222.

INDEX OF GREEK WORDS AND
προσρέπω, 357. προσρίπτω, 357. προστίθεσθαι, 67. προστρέπω, 397. προφήτης, 235 f. πταίω, 68. πυρράκης, 157. Tluppias, 336.
o interchanging with ¢, 185. -oay for -ν, 191. Σαούλ, 316. Σαῦλος ὃ kal Παῦλος, 313 f. Σεβ., 218. Σεβαστῆ, 218 t. σεριαβεβωθ, 333. Σιλας, 315. Σιλουανός, 315. Σίμων, 315, 316. Σινμαλκουή, 321. σιτομετρέω, 158. σιτομετρία [ 11, 158. σιτομέτριον, 158. σιφωνολογεία, 219. σκεοφυλακα [1], 158. σκευοφυλάκιον, 158. σκευοφύλαξὲ, 158. σμαράγδινος, 267. Σμύρνα, 18ῦ. Σμυρναῖος, 185. σουδάριον, 223. σοφίζομαι, 292. σπείρας, 186. σπείρης, 186. σπουδὴν εἰσφέρομαι, 864. σπυρίδιον, 158. σπυρίς, 158, 185. στάσις, 158 f. στεφάνιον, 345. στεφανόω, 345. στήλωμα, 159. στήλωσις, 159. στίγματα, 349 f. στρατεία, 181 f. στρατία, 181 f. συγγενής, 159. σύμβιος, 283. συμβιόω, 293. συμβούλιον, 238. Συμεών, 316. ἐκ συμφώνου, 255. σὺν καί, 265. συνέδριον τῶν πρεσβυτέρων, 156. συνέκτροφος, 310. συνέσχαν, 191. συνέχω, 160. συνσείω, 290. συντρίβω, 287. σύντροφος, 305, 310 f. σύντροφος τοῦ βασιλέως, 811 f συστρέφω, 287. σφραγίζω, 238 f. σφυρίδιον, 185. σφυρίς, 158, 185. σφυρίτιν, 185.


PHRASES.
σῶμα, 160. σωματοφύλαξ, 98. σωτήρ, 83.
7 for J, 189.
ταβαωθ, 333.
ταμεῖον, 182 f.
ταμιεῖον, 182 f.
-Tapa, 189.
Tapaé, 189.
ταστας, 357.
ταφή, 355 1.
ταχύ, 289.
τέκνα ἀπωλείας, 168, 165. τέκνα τοῦ διαβόλου, 163. τέκνα THIS “ἐπαγγελίας, 163. τέκνα κατάρας, 164. τέκνα ὀργῆς, 164.
τέκνα πορνείας. 165. τέκνα τῆς σοφίας, 108. τέκνα ὑπακοῆς, 163. τέκνα φωτός, 163. τέκνον, 161 ἢ,
τέτευχα, 190.
τήρησις, 267.
τιθέω, 192 f.
τίθημι, 192.
᾿τιθῶ, 192.
τίθω, 192.
τόπος, 267. τυγχάνω, 190. Τύρος, 382.
οὐχ ὃ τυχών, 255.
v= Heb. 6, 332.
τυθ, 332.
υἱοθεσία, 239.
καθ᾽ υἱοθεσίαν, 239.
υἱοὶ τοῦ αἰώνος τούτου, 163. υἱοὶ τῆς ἀναστάσεως, 168. viol τῆς ἀπειθείας, 163. υἱοὶ ἀποικίας, 165.
υἱοὶ τῆς βασιλείας, 162. υἱοὶ βροντῆς, 162.
υἱοὶ τῆς διαθήκης, 163. viol δυνάμεως, 165.
υἱοὶ ἡμέρας, 168.
υἱοὶ θεοῦ, 73.
υἱοὶ τοῦ νυμφῶνος, 162. υἱοὶ παρανόμων, 165.
υἱοὶ τοῦ πονηροῦ, 162.
υἱοὶ τῶν προφητῶν. 168. υἱοὶ τοῦ φωτός, 163.
υἱός, 161 1.
υἱὸς ἀ ἀνομίας, 165.
vids τῆς ἀπωλείας, 163. υἱὸς ᾿Αφροδισιέων, 1θ6. υἱὸς γεένης, 162,
υἱὸς τῆς γερουσίας, 165. υἱὸς τοῦ δήμου, 165.
υἱὸς διαβόλου, 163.
vids εἰρήνης, 163.
vids θανάτου, 165.
υἱὸς θεοῦ, 73, 83, 131, 166 f. vids παρακλήσεως, 163, 307 f. υἱὸς τῆς πόλεως, 165.
υἱὸς τῆς ὑπερηφανίας, 165.
ey
INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 375
υἱὸς ὑποζυγίου, 162. υἱοὶ [] φαρέτρας, 164. οἱ ὑπεράνω θεοί, 283 f. | ὑπερεντυγχάνω, 122.
οἱ ἐν ὑπεροχῇ ὄντες, 255. ὑπογέγραπται, 250 ὑποζύγιον, 160. ὑποπόδιον, 229. ὑποτιθοῦσα, 193.
φίλος, 167 f.
᾿Φαρεθώθης, 327. | a ad kal φιλότεκνος, χείρ, 251. 255 1
᾿φιλοπρωτεύω, 198.
᾿ φίλος θεοῦ, 1θ8. | φίλος τοῦ Καίσαρος, 168. ppevararns, 198.
τὸ αὐτὸ φρονεῖν, 256.
χάραγμα, 240 f.
τὴν χεῖρα ἐκδίδωμι, 251. τὰς χεῖρας δίδωμι, 251. χειρόγραφον, 247. χρηματίζω, 122. χωρίζομαι, 247.
-w@, forms in, 326 f.
φυλακτήρια, 352. τών, 208 f
pavouna, 77. Φαραώθης, 327.
φύσις ἀνθρωπίνη, 358. θεία φύσις, 368
ὠφείλαμεν, 191.

11.
INDEX OF
Abelard, Letters of, 46. Abydos in Egypt, 357. Accentuation of Greek Transcriptions of Semitic Words, 274. Acts of the Apostles— Lexical, 323. Literary Character, 39. ““We’’ Source, 58. Address, Form of, 22 ff. Angel, 79. Aorist, 190 f. Aorist as Inchoative, 68. ἅπαξ λεγόμενα, 64. Apocalypse οἵ John— Letters to Seven Churches, 54. Linguistic Character, 74. Literary Character, 39. Local Colouring (Asia Minor), 368 f. Mark of the Beast, 240 ff. Method of Exegesis, 240 ff. Apocope of Prepositions, 192. Apocrypha of O. T., Linguistic Character, 74 f.
Aristeas, Epistle of, 42, 72, 343. Aristides, Epistles, 32 Aristotle, Letters, 26 ff. Epistle, 31. Ark, Noah’s, as a ἱλαστήριον, 128. Associations, Language of Religious, 232, 267.
Ae ‘Supposed Inventor of Letter-writ-
g, 3. ΑΙ ἴοι of God,! Heaping up of, 297. Augment, 189, 191. Authority of Bible, Juristic Conception of, 113 f.
Barnabas, 307 ff.
Barnebo, 188.
Baruch, Epistle of, 42.
Beast, the, in Revelation, 240 ff.
Beelzebuth [?], Belsébuth, Belzebud, Bel- zébuth, 331 f.
Berytos, 333.


SUBJECTS.
Bible, Authority of, see Authority. Mode of Using, 271 f,, 281, 294 f., 300. Quotation of, see Quotation.
Biblical Writings, 36.
Material in Greek Magic Books, 280 f.
‘* Biblical” Greek, 65 ff, 173 ff.
Words and Constructions, 198 ff.
Bills of Sale, in Papyri, 242 ff.
Bishops, 230 f.
Blass, 173 ff., ete.
Book, Idea of, 6 f.
Book of Humanity, 173.
Cain, Mark of, 351. Camerarius, J., 13. Canon, 295. History of Ὁ. T., 3389; N. T., 56. Catholic Epistles, 50 f. Writings, 51. Cato, Epistles, 32. Charagma, 240 ff. Children of God, 73. Christianity and Literature, 58 f. Chyl, 333. Cicero, Letters, 29 f. Circumcido, 152. Circumcision, 151 ff. Citation, see Quotation. Claudius, Emperor, and the Jews, 68. Classics, Greek, and the N. T., 80, 366. Clavis#, 176, ete. Cleophas, 315. Codd. Sergii, 214. Conjugation, 190 ff. Consonants, Variation of, 183 ff. Corinthians, Letters to, 47 f. Second Letter to, 47 f., 54. Court and Religion, Language of, 73, 91 f. Creator of Heaven and Earth, 284. Cremer, H., 176 f., etc.
Dalmatia, 182. Declension, 186 f. Delmatia, 182.
1 On the same characteristic in Christian liturgies, see F. Probst, Litwrgie des
vierten Jahrhunderts und deren Reform,
Miinster i. W., 1893, p. 344 ff
376 INDEX OF
Demons, in Tombs, 281. | Believing and Trembling, 288.
Diogenes, Hpistle of, 42, 51.
Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Epistles of, 31.
Egyptian Church Fathers, 70. Egyptian Greek, 70 ff. Eisenmenger, J. A., Hntdecktes Juden- | thum, 288 f. Eldad, 336. Eleon, 209. Eleutheria, Festival of, in Egypt [1], 343. Emperor’s Day, 218 f. Epicurus, Letters, 9, 28. Epistles, 31. Epistle, 9, 20. Idea of, 9 f., 31 f. and Letter, 9 ff. Address, 12. Epistles— Catholic, 38, 50 ff. Early Christian, 50 ff., 57. Egyptian, 17. Graeco- Roman— Gastronomic, 33. Juristic, 33. Magic, 33. Medical, 33. Poetical, 33. Religious, 33. Jewish, 38 f. Aristeas, 42, 72, 343. Aristides, 32. Aristotle, 31. Cato, M. Porcius, 32. Dionysius of Halicarnassus, 31. Epicurus, 31. Lysias, 31. Pliny, 32. Plutarch, 31. Seneca, 32. “Baruch,” 42. **Diogenes,”’ 42. ‘«Hsther and Mordecai,”’ 41. «ς Heraclitus,” 42. ἐς Jeremiah,” 41. Epistle to Hebrews, 49 f. Epistle of James, 52 f. Epistles at beginning of 2nd Macc., 42. Pastoral Epistles, 54. First Mp. of Peter, 51 f. Second Ep. of Peter, 360 ff. Seven Epistles in Revelation, 54. Herder, 11 f. Epistles, Collections of, 12 ff. Unauthentic, 12 ff., 33 f. Forged, 12. Epistolography, Pseudonymous, 33 f. Esau, 336. Esther and Mordecai, 41. Esther, ele Letters subsequently added to, 41. Evangelium, 39.
Forgery, Literary, 13 f. Forms, Literary, 37.
SUBJECTS.
Formulaic Expressions, 191, 195, 196, 197 f., 204, 205 ff., 218, 221, 228 f., 230, 248-256.
Friend of God, 167 ff.
Fruit, Sacrifice of, 135 ff.
Galatians, Letter to, 47, 346 ff. Genuineness, Literary, 13 f. Gnostic, 353. God, 79. of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in Magic Formulae, 282. Grace, 73. Greek, ‘‘ Biblical,” 68 ff. Egyptian, 70 ff. Spoken among Jews, 77. of Biblical Writings, 61 ff. Translation of Semitic into, 74 ff. Biblical Writings originally in, 76 ff. Gregory VII., Letter of, 46. Grimm, W., 176, ete.
Hebraisms of N.T., 177. Imperfect, 195. So-called, 67, 70, 161 ff., 165, 194-198, 205 ff., 213, 248, 286, 289, 290, 295 ff. Hebrews, Epistle to, 49 f. Heliodorus, 303 ff. Heloise, Letters, 46.
| Heraclitus, Epistles, 42.
Herder, Epistles, 11 f. Homeromancy, 294. Homily, 53.
| Humanists, Letters, 16.
Immortality, 293. Imperfect, 191. Inscriptions, 173 ff, 178 ff., ete. Greek (from Asia Minor) and the N. T., 80 ff.. 366 ff. Greek (from Egypt) and the LXX, 72. Hebrew (outside Palestine), 77. Importance for Textual Criticism, 280. Imprecation-Tablets, see Tabulae Devo- tionis. Inspiration (verbal), 63, 81. Introduction to N. T., 55. Isocrates, Letters, 26 f.
Ja, Ja, 322. Jahava, 333. Jaho, 322. James the Less, 144 f. James, Epistle of, 52 f. Jaoth, 326 f. Jason of Cyrene, 304. Jeremiah, Letter of, 40 f. Epistle of, 41. Jesus, 58 f. Words of, Translated into Greek, 75. Jesus Justus, 315. Jesus Sirach, Prologue, 69, 359 ff. Chronology, 339 ff.
| Jews, 222 f., 232.
Edict of Ptolemy ΓΝ. Philopator against, 341 f. In the Fayytim, 149.
INDEX OF
Jews (continued)—
Dissemination of Greek among, 77. on Coast of N. Africa, 280 f. (See also Claudius, Name, Trajan.)
Jewish Greek, 68, 296 ff.
Words and Constructions, 198 ff.
Jobel, 100 f.
John the Divine, 231.
John Mark, 317.
John, ‘‘ Letters’’ of, 49 ἢ
Joseph Justus, 315.
Josephus, Hebraisms in, 67, 70.
The Jewish War as a Translation, 67, 7D:
Jubilee, Year of, 100 f.
Juristic Expressions, 196 ff., 200, 213, 221, 227, 228 f., 229 f., 230, 231, 232 f., 233, 238, 239 f., 242 ff., 247, 248 f., 249 f., 251 f., 253, 254 f., 257, 264 f., 266.
Kapporeth, 124 ff. Kepler, Letters, 5. Κοινή, the, 80.
Late Greek, 173 ff., 296. Legal Terms, etc., see Juristic. Letter, Conception of, 3 f., 6 f. Address, 50 f. addressed to more than one, 4, 18 f. and Hpistle, 9 ff. and Literature, 6 f., 16, 21. Ancient Classifications, 35. Modern Classifications— Congregational, 19, 45. Doctrinal, 45 f. Family, 18 f. Official, 28. Pastoral, 46. Private, 19, 45. ᾿ Subsequently Published, 8 ff., 20 f. True, 20. See also Atossa. Letters, Babylonian-Assyrian, 17. Early Christian, 42 ff. Greek, 21 ff. Jewish, 38 ff. Papyrus, 22 ff. Roman, 28 ff. Aristotle, 26. Abelard and Heloise, 46. Cicero, 29 ff. Epicurus, 9, 28. Gregory VII., 46. Isocrates, 10, 26 f. Italian Humanists, 16. Jeremiah, 40 f. Kepler, 5. Luther, 28. Moltke, 5. Ninck, 19. Origen, 48. Paul, 42 ff. Réslinus, 5. Letters, Public Papers and Speeches, in- sertion of, in Historical Works, 28 f., 39, 41 f.

SUBJECTS. 377 Letters and Epistles of the Bible, problem of Literary History, 34 ff. Literature of [Brieflitteratur], 17, 50. Collections of, 27 f. Letter-writing, Guides to, 35. ‘* Letters,” ‘‘ Large,” 348. Lexical and Syntactical Notes, see Voca- bulary and Syntax. Litanei, 298. Literature, Character of, 6 f. Biblical, 36. History of Karly Christian, 55 f. Jewish, its Influence on Early Christian Authors, 39. See also Letter, Christianity. Liturgy, 298. Logia, Translators of, 75. Longinus, 43. Lord’s Day, 218 f. Love Spell, 279. Luke, Prologue to Gospel of, 76. Luther, Letter to his Son, 28. Luther’s Bible, 73, 134 f. Lysias, Epistles of, 31.
lst.
Maccabees, Books of, 179. Second, 42, 303 f. Third, 342. Fourth, 50.
Magic Literature,
352 ff.
Manaén, 310 ff.
Mark of the Beast, in Revelation, 240 ff.
Marks of Jesus. 349 ff.
Merey-seat, 124 ff.
Minatory Formulae, 356.
Greek, 273 ff., 323,
Miracle at Red Sea in Magic Formulae,
285.
Moltke, Letter of, 5.
Mons Olivarum, 211.
Oliveti, 211.
Mordecai, see Esther. Morpholog y, Notes on, 186-193.

' Mother’s Name in Magic Formulae, 283.
_ Mule, Infertility of, 285 ἢ Mysehi, 333.
| Name of God, Unutterable, 287 f. Ee in -ην, 310 f. Double, ot Jews, 314. Greek, of Similar Sound added to Bar- baric, ΘΠ: Greek, substituted for Hebrew, 315. Theophoric, 309 f. See also Proper.
Nebo, 309 f. ᾿ | “New Testament’”’ Greek, 179 ff.
Words and Constructions, 198 ff. Ninck, Letter to his Congregation, 19. Nun, 308 f.
Olives, Mount of, 208 ff.
Origen, Letters, 48.
Orthography, Notes on, 181-185. ΘΝ. ΠΣ 81. of Ptolemaic Papyri and LXX, 72.
378 INDEX OF
Osiris Myth, 356 f.
Overbeck, F., his Conception of the Beginnings of Christian Literature, 37 f.
Palms and White Robes, 368 ff. Papyri, 173 ff., 179 f., etc. their Value for LX X-study, 71 ff. Papyrus Letters, 21 ff. Paradise, 148. Pastoral Epistles, 54. Paul, his Name, 313 ff. Characteristics, 359. and the Galatians, 346 ff. his Greek, 64, 76, 296 f. Legal Terms used by, 107 f. (see also Juristic Expressions). Opinion of Longinus, 43. and the Religious Speech of Imperial Period, 366 f. was he an Epistolographer ? 42 ff. Paul, Letters of— Canonisation, 49. Collection and Publication, 56. False Conceptions regarding, 43. Standpoint of Criticism, 57 ff. Standpoint of Exegesis, 57. their Value as Sources, 57 f. to Corinthians, 47 f.; (Second) 47 f., 54. to Galatians, 47, 346 ff. to Philemon, 45, 56. to Philippians, 45. to Romans, 48 f. Rom. xvi., 45, 283. See also Camerarius. Permutations of Vowels in Magic, 325, 329. Perfect, 192. Peter, First Epistle of, 51 f., Second, 360 ff. Peschito, 211. Philemon, Letter to, 45, 56. Philippians, Letter to, 45. Phrases and Formule, see Formulaic. Pliny, Letters, 32. Plutarch, Letters, 31. Praecido, 152. Prayers, Form of, 297 f. Prepositious, 192, 195, 196, 197, 213, 216 f., 221, 227, 265 f. See also Greek Preps. in Index I. Presbyter, 154 ff., 233 ff. Priests, 233 ff. Proper Names, 187 ff., 301 ff. Prophets, 235 ff. Propitiatory Cover, 124 ff. Proseuche, 222 f. Protective Marks, 240 f., 350 ff. Providentia Specialissima. 285. Pseudonymity, Idea of Literary, 18 ff., 41. Ptolemaic Period— Official Diction of, 343 ff. Greek Legal Terminology of, 104 f., 344. Ptolemy [V. Philopator, Edict against Jews, 341 ff.
Quotation, Mode of Biblical, 76, 89, 295. in Synoptists, 102 ff., 162 f.

SUBJECTS.
Religion of Book or Document, 59, 113.
Religion, History of, 36, 58, 271 f.
Religious ideas, Change of Meaning, 78 ff.
Religious Diction of Asia Minor, 360 ἢ, 366 f.
Religious Terms and Expressions, 195 f., 196, 215 f., 216 f., 222 f., 224 Ὁ 226 f., 230 f., 231 f., 2382 Ὁ 233 ff., 235 ff, 248, 250, 254, 258.
Remissio, 99.
Revelation, see Apocalypse.
Ritschl’s (A.) view of ἱλαστήριον, 133 f.
Romans, Letter to, 48 f.
Rom. xvi., 45, 283.
Roslinus, Letter, 5.
Samaria in the Fayytim, 586.
Samaritan Pronunciation of Tetragramma- ton, 334 ff.
Samaritans in the Fayytim, 335 f.
Scholia, possible Value of, for Biblical Philology, 200.
Seal, Roman Imperial, 242 ff.
Semitic Elements in Greek Inscriptions, 188 f.
Semitisms, see Hebraisms.
Seneca, Epistles, 32.
Septuagint, 66 ff., 173, 179, 199, 202, 205 ff., 261 f., 271, 280, 294, 295 ff., ete.
Change of Meaning in terms of, 78 f.,. 124 f.
Lexicon to, 73 f.
Mode of Investigating, 124 ff.
Quotations from, 76.
Study of, xf.
and Early Christian Writers, 77 ff.
asa Monument of Egyptian Greek, 70 ff.
Egyptianising ‘‘ Tendency ”’ of, 73
Influence of Hebrew Sounds on its Greek Words, 99.
Relation to the Ptolemaic Papyri, 70 ff.
Transcription of Unknown Hebrew Words, 99.
| Serapeum at Memphis, 140.
Show bread, 157.
Signs, Sacred, 349 ff.
Son of God, 73.
Spirit, 78.
Stigma, Purpose of, 349 f.
Superstition, 272 f., 297 f., 323, 352 ff.
Sunday, 218 f.
Synagogue, 222 f.
Synonymic of Religious Terms of Harly-
Christianity, 104.
Synoptists, 297. Linguistic Character of, 74 f. Semitic Sources of, 162 f.
Syntax, Notes on, 194 ff.
Syth, 333.
Tabulae Devotionis, 279. from Adrumetum, 279 ff., 356. from Carthage, 274, 284, 289. Technical Expressions, 228-247, 254, 257,. 264 f., 266, 267. See also Formulaic Expressions.
Tetragrammaton, 319 ff. Thayer, J. H., 176, etc.
Thephillin, 353.
INDEX OF TEXTS.
Verb, 189 ff. Vocabulary and Syntax, Notes on, 194- 267.
379
Traditional Forms of Sem. Names in Greek Vowels, Variation of, 180 ff.
Texts, 330.
Trajan’s Jewish War, Sources for, 68, 316. Transcriptions, Vocalic, of the Tetragram-
maton, 330.
| Vulgate, 211, 225. | White Robes and Palms, 368 ff.
Translations of Sem. Originals into Greek, Y, ean = Heb. 6 (and 6), 333. 74 ff. | Yt
al
oe
LCE
117
Ss
2 8 ff.
6 16 [5] 14 19- 22 1711 1712 1817 D7 23 4 93 11 93, 16 DF 25 82 10 84 29 36 6 36 24 40 21 411 43 21
Exopvus.
4.26 : 56+ 10- τ 1b 19 ᾿ 139-16,
1415f. .
158
15 18
175
9017
212% ,
2516071 ,
95 20 [21] Ὲ 2530. ,
26 34
80 25
8] 10
35 2
376
385
om i 39 41 [19]
GENESIS.
158,
284 286 289 289 286
148 | 128 |
284 351 152

168 |
207
149 | 164 | 260 |
157 120
160 |
999. III. INDEX OF TEXTS. LEVITICUS. 2u, aie . 135 f. 418, 129 13 41: 42. 43° 88 1614 127 199 151 1095τ:. . 901 10:8 349 19 36 116 14 106 PAGS Σ 351 24 16 288 ΟΣ Do αὐ - 101, 138 95 10. 11. 12. 13-15- Fe Ξ . LOOT. 25 25 106, 229 25 30 , 106 Pee ὁ 101 NUMBERS. AD Se Seas ae 141 ae? 141 1427 110 1428 205 16 22 327 23 19 199 27 16 327 3] 50 150 | 33 27 fe 189 | 3612 164 DEUTERONOMY. 1 Ss Lc ee 230 ] 31 199 412 114 7 26 310 1016 151 1017 283. 123 310 12 52 114 141: 351 152 123 25 2 165 25 15 116 2614 . 1865 27 26 248 28 58 282 306 151 JOSHUA. 5 12 Re, 136

JUDGES. 510 160: 514 ΒΤ 112 19 19 . 160 19 22 165.
1 SAMUEL. 45:5 ς θ8. De 2 17 42 157 Seah 158 ὡς 42 120 20 18 90: 20 31 165 216 157 282 98 2 SAMUEL.
Dil as 165. 7a 120 125, 1828 165 22'S a 91 2216 98 23 21 120
1 Kings. | 427[31] 292 7 2+ 38 | 153: 1911 287 2035, 163 20 355 351
2 Kings. 23+ 5+7 163 15 16 ff. , 310: 1814 102 24 18 f. , 25 | ᾿ 110f. ΡΣ te ace 310:
1 CHRONICLES.
RD. 139: Q 26- 33 150 .11 28 120 16 25 283 187 115 282 158 289 190 28 11 127 | 29 4 "260, 262
980
2 CHRONICLES.


49,618 . 127 9 1 : 260 | 9 29 308 131 157 | 158 308 221 145 2414 A) 141 261 . 110,115 28 6 ey Gaal 287 115 8112 115 | Se Ἔ a ES 9914, . 141, 288 | Ezra. (2 Ezra or EspDRAS.) 41 165 65 308 6 20 139 8 29 150 10 7:16 165 | NEHEMIAH | 15 : 283 | 28 148 | 414 289. 61 908 1098 157 10 928: 118 13 28 290 | ESTHER 13, 218 : 108 Del. 98 ὃ 38 92 01 153 69 168 et 92 ee 153 Q 20. 29 41 102 114 103 16] JOB. Pj 123 7 10-15 123 142 151 149 220 218 102 216 293 2] 32 288 | 24 12 123 26 3 365 273 : 205 3] 29 293 91 38 3605 3474 293 38 39 291 38 5. 391-3 285 42 18 118 PSALMS 29 ei . 120] 11 (12]7 ΘΠ ΠῚ 17 [18]8 290 |
INDEX OF TEXTS.

18 [19]8-20 . 292 29 [80]6. 95 | 32 [33]8 . 291 32 [33]9 . 289 | 32 [33]4 . 290 33 [384]> . 150 38 [39] 8 149 46 [47]# 283 47 [48] 293 50 [51] 12 290 57 [58]8 151 59 [60]: 290 66 [67]§ 29] 71 [1218 282 73 [74] 8 284 73 [74] 16 289 75 [76]? 283 76 [7729 290 77 [78] 287 (fo 162 | 88 [89] 8 283 88 [89] 28 165 88 [89] 25 109 88 [89] 3 120 89 [90] ete | abil: 95 [96]: . 283, 284 96 [97]10 οὐ θεν 98 [99]38. 283 98 [99]8 . 122 102 [1038]5 . 290 109 [104]*2 . 290 104 [106] 287 108 [109] 154 110{111]9 . 282 3 | 110 [111] 2° 292 117 [118] 1° 11-12 151 118 [119]179 . 92 125 [126]4 98 127 [128]? 220 f. | 143 [144] 2 220 145 [146]® 284 PROVERBS. 17 292 | 38 154 62 123 8 29 287 8 #4 283 g 10 292 91 123 111 110 188 123 1511 164 16 28 123 224 292 221 123 27 8: 1ὅ 123 27 21 261 306 F 114 315 165 ECCLESIASTES. 25 148 CANTICLES. 418 148


ISAIAH.
312 ἌΝ ΝΣ 154
3 20 150
57 220
61’ 159 1024 120 116-7 291 13° 290, 138 293, 1412 164 192 145 2215 1 264 283 ὩΣ 116 3017 135 3318 eee 33 21 . 116, 283 33 23 oe IBS) 36 22 112 38 2 135 40° 162 401 102 40 12 291 40 28 283 42 12 95, 96 43 21: 20 δ 96 445 τ Ol 45 1 tt . 867 461 . 809 464 > 102 534 11 loz: 53 12 . 89 562 . 164 574 163, 165 59 5:6 . 135 6211 162 65 2 291 66 12 102
JEREMIAH.
44 Bale
4 24 εὐ 291 105 . 103 1] 16 : ον 152 27 [50] 39 = 4292 38 [31]? . Se alls 38 [381]19. . 226) 44 [37] 15. 20 Ε 110, 112 By) a ees er nel Oite
LAMENTATIONS. Spas me 164 347 98 ff. EZEKIEL.
63 : ΡΟ 0)!
9 ἘΠ ΘΠ 10 19, 1 22 283, 284 1119” Ὁ . 290, 164 151 193-6 291 22,25 291 27° 19 27 16 99 33 27, 348, 356, 365 205 366 291 36 28 283
36 26 38 19 999
407, 412,
4314
45 10
17. 20
DANIEL.
, 290,
HOSEA.
JOEL.
HABAKKUK. ZEPHANIAH. HAGGAI.
ZECHARIAH.
160, 162,
MALACHI.
1 [3] Espras.
290 | 4 EspDRAS. 205 | 7 3, 852, : 148 120 | 153 | ΤΌΒΙΤ. 126) 215 a 135 116 1010 160 127 | 101 JUDITH. 99. 112 Atos 205 227 226 49 262 125) 91 91 363 127 98 92 | 291 WISDOM OF SOLOMON. 1411 115 293 35 248 619 107 165 | 714 168 107 | 727 168, 290 120 g13-17 293 821: 121 [158 ἕ 293 107 | 173 299 98 Ἷ 290 STRACH. (ECCLESIASTICUS. )” 127 | Prologue . 340 ff. LOD a 123 1212 267 120 | 135 293 122 8: 21 96[39118.. 284 | 287 | 36 19 [14 or 16 7] 93 158 | 377 117 43 29 283 4514 |. 138 95 | 519013) 293 BaRucH. 290 | 929 205 4 35 281 340 | EPISTLE OF JEREMIAH. Yoo 117 eae Sone OF THE THREE CHILDREN. 340 τὰ rf 164 | VY: 136 248 262 SUSANNA. 351 | v. 42 283 211 | | BEL AND THE DRAGON. ΜΡ 5); Ay, bly 162 |v. 5. . 117, 284 ν. 22 ee aly? ν. 32 160 τς ΒΈΒΤ OF ESTHER. 136] 51 293 284 92 PRAYER OF MANASSES. 122 | v. 1-4 298

INDEX OF TEXTS.

381
PSALMS OF SOLOMON. 8-10
15 351 1 MAcCABEES. ECS RAR αὐ 3) ἄγετ £2" 5. S165 3 23> 32 306 542, 112 Gea & 251 7 5+ 12+ 20 fF. 314 820 232 Q 54 fF. 314 10 25 45 86 GeO et 321 dat 50. 62+ 66 951 ey 340: 13 50 251 1427 340 2 MACCABEES. GS δος : 214 1:12 ᾿ 290 148. 298 Sie 303 3 1-39 293 τον Me 306 Sal: 255 B85 121 416 150: 4 29. 31 all 5 Aiea) οἰ 251 447, 200 449, 293 5.8... Ὁ 200 49, 84 203 gu, 160 g 29 310 108 157 101} 306 1] 16 232 1119 253 1] 26 251 1] 44 232 12.11.12 251 12 35 203 1248 219 13 2 28 306 13 22 251 143 314 1419 251 14 26 115 14.30 93 14 38 262 152 293 157 92 3 MACCABEES. 22 ff. es . 298 221 weeds 229 349, 351 2 33 Εν 192 BG 255 3 11 ff 28 841 ff. 4 20 342 534 138 6 2 ff 298 6 40 121
6 41 262 71 306 7 20 345 4 MACOABEES. 426,52, 85:8 . . 139 98 : 263 1010 95 13 13. M7, 14 12, 15 5: 16, 162 : 139 17 2 126 1811 138 MATTHEW. 120, 212 f. 19. 22 953 541 86, 182 6 2. 5.18 999 6} 214 Uz 198 812 162 817 . 102f. 915 162 102 332 1027f . 248 11 10: 19 ἘΠ 13} 1112 . 258 124 _ StL 13 35: 38 ¢ ΟΣ: 15 37, 1610 158 18 32) Sree 221 ee τ ΟΣ iy el ΤΙ D9 se ee ἸΌ0-525 4 215 ἢ 23 15 162 243 211 24 31 248 25 30 68 26 30 211 27 19 253 27 32 86 27 65 f. 66, 28 1 θ8 MARK. 12f, 219 317 , 162 | oe προ esis 76 | Ὁ 9:1 τς sill) 59 . 209 7% . 189 8 8: 20 158 8191 wes 9 38 . 198 111 . 209f. 1219 . 190 133 5 PALL 1327 . 248 1419 138, 139 1426 5 PALL 15 21 86, 182 15 40 144 168 293 16 20 109 LUKE. 19 252 11:0 232 2.42 252

INDEX OF TEXTS.

334 282 ju 190 5 33 250 5 34 162 6 24 229 6 48 f- 123 721: 35, 106. 163
ie 7 ‘ 214
123 158
1258 154
13 34 190
14 10 267
1429 5 5195
1512 . 290
168 το 7695
1610 . 258
1710 5) ats)
192 209 ff.
19 37 212, 232
20 18 . 225
20 34- 36 ν᾿ 163 21 37, 22.39 209 ff.
22,63" 160
oi 229
23 48 148
244 263
24 18 315
JOHN.
81 211 89 5 UBthe 126 257 1236 163 15.168 242 1515 108 1712 165 19 22 113 19 26 315 20 15 102 218 153 Acts,
1 10 263 | 112 208 ff. 115 196 1 28 315 125 267 26 ΤΣ 3 25 163 43 267 4 32 233 4 36 163, 307 5 18 267
62 ‘190, 233 | 65 233 751 191 810 336 9417 316 9 25 158 9 36. 39 189 1022 265 | 1210 189
Sie. . 360
131 310 ff.
13 6: 10 . 168
139 313 f.

1318 5 sili 13 21 . 316 1427 . 190 151. , . ΒΩ 15 12: 30 5. 288) 1514 315, 316 15 39 5 ly 162 265 1635 227 171 254 182 187 186 253 1821 , 252 U9 360 1S 233 191 255 10 281 19 18: 19 929 20 26 196 21 18 252 2] 22 233 227-13 316 2212 265 23 35 230 2417 117} 241 258 20a 257 252, 229 2559 θά 204 292 26 14: 24 316 267 262 27 74 316 282 255 28 30 258 ROMANS. 32 129, 266 41 , 153, 351 f. 416 , . 109 bay 107 5 16-18 264 81 . 264 ἢ, 822, . 253 82 122 8. 27- 34 121 98 163 1015: 107 111 316 112 121 121 254 125 138 156 119 158 109 15 16 258 1519 316 15 20 123 15 26 118 15 28 238 163 187 167 192 169 283 1 CORINTHIANS. 6-8 109
421
’ 119 f., 358
61 . 233 618 τ 20. 73 a 124 Ye . 192 ee is 204, 255 7 10. 11. 15 3 247 LOSS . 224 19010 . 5 Wit® 1218 ., 5 BY? ΠΟ ΣΒ τ 99) 145, 152 5 118 153f . » 200 15 258. . 316 15 38 - δ 161 118, 142 f. 162 142 f. 169 316 167 A 5 oo ey 2 CORINTHIANS. 16 sees 109 19 Pia 257 qu 122 112 88 121: 109 33 59 | 410 360 413 250 δ 109 516 253 71 216 84 els 88 . 250, 261 810 ee al 91:18 118 92 221 Q 5-12 144 104 181 10° 73 | ial. 349 118 266 | 1] 22 183 122 190 124 148 1214 252 GALATIANS. Ὥστ On ie Gare σι 96] Giles δε . 360 gy ς » »« 248 3b, . 109, 114 4 25- 26 = 916 428 163 5 20 . 360 6} τς 940 ἢ 617 . 103, 346 ff. EPHESIANS. 22 τον 163 23 88, 164 2 20 123 56-8 163 PHILIPPIANS. 14 ὁ, 250 iis we 253 |


INDEX OF TEXTS.
VG 108 Zo ων . 956 ἘΠ’ 7s. ο΄. 108 85 . 816 43 . 64, 265 418 . 229, 258 COLOSSIANS. 110 . . 224, 248 214 91, 247, 252 | 36 5 oy alas 4u 315 1 THESSALONIANS. 212 248 411 θά δ5 163 | 5 10 64 | 2 THESSALONIANS, 23 163 91} 220 1 ΤΙΜΟΤΗΥ. 21 121 50) 22 2D 36 220 315 88 45 121 519 118 6 16 293 619 123 - 2 ΤΊΜΟΤΗΥ. 410 182 418 969 TITUS. 24 255 Pi 254 28 200 HEBREWS. 11: lat 22-3 τ 07 211 . ἢ 36 ΤΩ 7 416 5 uel 61 - 1B 63 » (252 64 205-6-7-8 6 16 107, 229 718 » res! 72 » 12] 86 >, 190 91 ZG gl7 07 926 . 228 f. 958 89 1038 5 tale) 1138 . 149 1222 ole 1228 5 8685 1318 88, 194

JAMES.
oer ee Oe . 198, 263
1 PETER.
2 PETER.
1 JOHN.
3 JOHN.
JUDE.
REVELATION.
984 INDEX OF TEXTS.
1516: 141149, | 352 re POG a ale 189 | CiLEM. Rom. CLEM. Rom.
Gan. ere tg) teen EPG GLa a og 4 160 | 2 CORINTHIANS. 39%,90¢ τ ἡ 2 ἢ 352] 1 CORINTHIANS. eae ΘΙ ΤΟ Ὁ ΘΕ ΤΩΣ eae ΒΙΌΣ. .. 8 Ὁ ον. 190 al Eh ME ee αι χοὸς ing pe ODOR 2B rent a os % 292
PAE RE AT NL oy, Oe ἤν λας, tee Le IS 122 D 512). aries 1S0WbGOMe. . ΄. . 121 as 92,18 f ΠΟ TIN. TR. co le, S 2GdN1S 2%. ce ek cae woes 236




WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
DIE NEUTESTAMENTLICGE FORME PINKCHRIST OES):
1392 τ 8, x. 1590.5 ΜΗ 50:
JOHANN KEPLER. UND ΤΕ BIBEE
EIN BEITRAG ZUR GESCHICHTE DER SCHRIFT- AUTORITAT.
1894. 8. 368. M. —60.
MARBURG IN HeEssE: N. G. ELWERT.
THE ABERDEEN UNIVERSITY PRESS LIMITED.

PUBLICATIONS OF
Ἔα αν (Τὺ «Aa! Ee onthe) 38 GEORGE STREET, EDINBURGH. LONDON: SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, HAMILTON, KENT, & CO. LIMITED.
Abbott (1. K., B.D., D.Lit.)—EpHEsIAns AND CoLossIANs. (Inter-
national Critical Commentary.) Post 8vo, 10s. 6d. Adam (J., D.D.)—AN EXPOSITION OF THE EPISTLE OF JAMES. 8vo, 9s.
Adamson (Rev. T., D.D.)—Srupies or THE MIND IN CHRIST. Post 8vo, 4s. 6d.
THE SPIRIT OF Power. Second Edition, fcap. 8vo, 1s. Ahlfeld (Dr.), etc.—THE VOICE FROM THE Cross. Cr. 8vo, price 5s. Alcock ἐπ ee SEVEN CHURCHES OF ASIA. 15. Alexander(Prof. W. Lindsay)—BIBsLicaLTHEOLOGY. Twovols. 8v0, 21s,
Allen (Prof. A. V. G., D.D.)—CurisTIAN INSTITUTIONS. (International Theological Library.) Post 8vo, 12s.
Ancient Faith in Modern Light, The. 8vo, 10s. 6d. Andrews (S. J.)—Tue Lire or our Lorp. Large post 8vo, 9s.
Ante-Nicene Christian Library—A CoLLECTION OF ALL THE WORKS OF THE FATHERS OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH PRIOR TO THE COUNCIL OF Nicwa. Twenty-four vols. 8vo, Subscription price, £6, 6s. Selection of Four Volumes at Subscription price of 215. Additional Volume, containing MSS. discovered since the completion of the Series, 12s. 6d. net.
Augustine’s Works—Edited by Marcus Dons, D.D. Fifteen vols.
8vo, Subscription price, £3, 19s. net. Selection of Four Volumes at Sub- scription price of 21s.
Balfour (R. G., D.D.)—CENTRAL TRUTHS AND SIDE IssuEs. Crown 8vo, 85. 6d.
Ball (W. E., LL.D.)—Sr. PAUL AND THE RoMAN Law. Post 8vo, 4s. 6d.
Ballard (Frank, M.A., B.Sc.)—TuHr MiraAcues oF UNBELIEF. Third Edition. Post 8vo, 6s.
Bannerman (Prof.)—THEr CHURCH OF CHRIST. Two vols. 8vo, 21s. Bannerman (D. D., D.D.)—THE DocTRINE OF THE CHURCH. 8vo, 12s. Bartlet (Prof. J. Vernon, M.A.)—Tue Apostotic AcE: Its [ΠΡῈ,
DoctTrRINE, WoRSHIP, AND Pouity. (Lras of Church History.) Crown 8vo, 6s. Baumgarten (Professor)—ApostoLtic History. Three vols. 8vo, 27s. Bayne (P., LL. D.)—THeE FREE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND. Post 8vo, 3s. 6d. Beck (Dr.)—OUTLINES OF BIBLICAL PSYCHOLOGY. Crown 8vo, 4s.
PASTORAL THEOLOGY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. Crown 8vo, 6s.
Bengel—GNomMon OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. With Original Notes, Explanatory and Illustrative. Five vols. 8vo, Subscription price, 31s. 6d. Cheaper Edition, the five volumes bound in three, 24s.
Besser’s CHRIST THE LIFE OF THE WORLD. Price 6s.
Beyschlag (W., D.D.)—NEw TESTAMENT THEOLOGY. ‘Two vols. demy 8yo, Second Edition, 18s. net.
Bible Dictionary. Edited by Jas. Hastines,D.D. Special Prospectus on application. In Four Volumes. (Vols. I., 11., and III. now ready.)


* * Detailed Catalogue free on application.


tO
T. and T. Clark's Publications.

Bible-Class Handbooks. Crown 8vo. Forty-four Volumes, ls. 3d. to
3s. each. Edited by Prof. Marcus Dons, D.D., and ALEx. Wuytr, D.D. Detailed List free on application.
Bible-Class Primers. Thirty-nine now issued in the Series. Edited by Princ. 8S. Ὁ. F. SAtmonp, D.D. Paper covers, 6d. each ; free by post, 7d. In cloth, 84. ; free by post, 9d. Detailed List free on application.
Bigg (Prof. C., D.D.)—Sr. Perer anp Sr. JupE.  (Jnternational Critical Commentary.) Post 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Blaikie (Prof. W. G., D.D.)—Tur PREACHERS OF SCOTLAND FROM THE 6TH TO THE 19TH CENTURY. Post 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Blake (Buchanan, B.D.)—How Τὸ Reap THE Propuets. Part I._— The Pre-Exilian Minor Prophets (with Joel). Second Edition, 4s. Part II. —Isaiah (ch. i.-xxxix.). Second Edition, 2s. 6d. Part III.—Jeremiah, 4s. Part 1V.—Ezekiel, 4s, Part V.—Isaiah (ch. xl.-lxvi.), and the Post-Exilian Prophets. The Series being now complete, Messrs. Clark offer the Set of Five Volumes for 15s.
Bleek’s INTRODUCTION To THE NEW TESTAMENT. Two vols. 8vo, 21s.
Briggs (Prof. C. A., D.D.)—GENERAL INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY oF Hoty Scripture (Replacing the Author's ‘Biblical Study,’ entirely re-written and greatly enlarged). 8vo, 12s. net.
THE MESSIAH OF THE APOSTLES. Post 8vo, 7s. 6d. THE MESSIAH OF THE GOSPELS. Post 8vo, 6s. 6d. THE BIBLE, THE CHURCH, AND THE REASON. Post 8vo, 6s. 6d.
Brockelmann (C.)—Lrxicon Syriacum. With a Preface by Professor T. NOLDEKE. Crown 4to, 30s. net.
Bruce (Prof. A. B., D.D.)—Tur TRAINING OF THE TWELVE ; exhibiting
the Twelve Disciples under Discipline for the Apostleship. Fifth Edition, 8vo, 10s. 6d.
THE HUMILIATION OF CHRIST. 4th Ed., 8vo, 10s. 6d.
THE ΚΊΝΟΡΟΜ oF Gop ; or, Christ’s Teaching according to the Synoptical Gospels. New Edition, post 8vo, 7s. 6d.
APOLOGETICS ; OR, CHRISTIANITY DEFENSIVELY STATED. (International Theological Library.) Third Edition, post 8vo, 10s. 6d.
St. PAUL’s CONCEPTION OF CHRISTIANITY. Post 8vo, 7s. 6d.
THE EPISTLE To THE HEBREWS: The First Apology for Christianity. Second Edition, post 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Bruce (W.8., D.D.)—THE Eruics oF THE OLD TESTAMENT. Cr. 8vo, 4s. Buchanan (Professor)—THE DoctRINE OF JUSTIFICATION. 8vo, 10s. 6d. ON CoMFORT IN AFFLICTION. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d. ON IMPROVEMENT OF AFFLICTION. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.
Buhl (Prof. F.)—Canon AND TEXT OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Bungener (Felix)—RoME AND THECOUNCILIN 19™CENTURY. Cr.8vo,5s.
Burton (Prof. E.)—Synrax oF THE Moops AND TENSES IN NEW TESTAMENT GREEK. Post 8vo, 5s. 6d. net.
Calvin's INSTITUTES OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION. (Translation. )2vols.8vo, 14s.
COMMENTARIES. Forty-five Vols. Price on application.
Calvini Institutio Christiane Religionis. Curavit A. THOLUCK.
Two vols. 8vo, Subscription price, 14s.
Candlish (Prof. J. S., D.D.)—Tur Kinepom or Gop, BrsLIGALLY AND HISTORICALLY CONSIDERED. 8vo, 10s. 6d.



LT. and T. Clark’s Publications. 3

Candlish (Prof. J. §., D.D.)—TuHeE CuristiAN SALVATION. Lectures on the Work of Christ. 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Caspari (Ὁ. E.)—A CHRONOLOGICAL AND GEOGRAPHICAL INTRODUC- TION TO THE LIFE oF CHRIST. 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Caspers (A.)—THE FOOTSTEPS OF CHRIST. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Cassel (Prof. )—COoMMENTARY ON ESTHER. ὅνο, 10s. 6d.
Cave (Principal A., D.D.)—THE ScrIPTURAL DocTRINE OF SACRIFICE AND ATONEMENT. Second Edition, 8vo, 10s. 6d.
AN INTRODUCTION TO THEOLOGY. Second Edition, 8vo, 12s.
Chapman (Principal C., LL.D.)—PreE-OrGANIC EVOLUTION AND THE
BIBLICAL IDEA OF Gop. Crown 8vo, 6s.
Christlieb (Prof. T., D.D.)—MopERN DOUBT AND CHRISTIAN BELIEF. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Homitetic: Lectures on Preaching. 7s. 6d. Clark (Professor W. R., LL.D., D.C.L.)—THE ANGLICAN REFORMA- TION. (ras of Church History.) 6s.
——— THE Paracuete. The Person and Work of the Holy Spirit. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.
WITNESSES TO CHRIST. A Contribution to Christian Apolo- getics. Crown 8vo, 4s.
Clarke (Professor W. N., D.D.)—AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEoLocy. Ninth Edition, post 8vo, 7s. 6d.
WHAT SHALL WE THINK OF CHRISTIANITY? Cr. 8vo, 2s. 6d.
— CAN I BELIEVE IN GOD THE FATHER? Crown 8vo, 3s.
Concordance to the Greek Testament—Mou tron (W. F., D.D.) and GEDEN (A. S., M.A.). Second Edition, crown 4to, 26s. net.
Crawford (J. H., M.A.)—THE BROTHERHOOD OF MANKIND. Crown 8vo, 5s.
Cremer (Professor)—BrisLico-THEOLOGICAL LEXICON OF NEw TESTA- MENT GREEK. Third Edition, with Supplement, demy 4to, 38s.
Crippen (Rev. T. G.)—A PopuLar INTRODUCTION TO THE HIsToRY OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE. 8vo, 9s.
Cunningham (Principal)—HIstToricaAL THEOLOGY. Two vols. 8vo, 21s.
Curtiss (Dr. 5. I.)\—Tue LEviITIcAL PRIESTS. Crown 8vo, 5s.
FRANZ DetitzscH: A Memorial Tribute. Portrait. Cr. 8vo, 3s.
Dabney (Prof. R. L., D.D.)—THE SENSUALISTIC PHILOSOPHY OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY CONSIDERED. Crown 8yo, 6s.
Dahle (Bishop)—Lirr AFTER DEATH. Demy 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Dalman (Prof. 6.)--- ΤῊΝ WorpDs oF JESUS.
Davidson (Prof. A.B., D.D., LL.D.)—ANn InTRopUcTORY HEBREW GRAMMAR. With Progressive Exercises in Reading and Writing. 17th Edition, 8vo, 7s. 6d.
A SYNTAX OF THE HEBREW LANGUAGE. 2nd Ed., 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Davidson, Dr. Samuel. Autobiography and Diary. Edited by his DAUGHTER. 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Davies (Principal D. C.)\—THE ATONEMENT AND INTERCESSION OF Curist. Crown 8vo, 4s.
Deane (Wm., M.A.)— PsEUDEPIGRAPHA: An Account of Certain Apocryphal Writings of the Jews and Early Christians. Post 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Deissmann (Dr. G. A.)—BIBLE STUDIES. 8vo, 9s.
Delitzsch (Prof.)\—SysteM oF BIBLICAL PsycHOLoGY, 8vo, 12s. ; New CoMMENTARY ON GENESIS, 2 vols. 8vo, 21s. ; PSALMS, 3 vols., 31s. 6d. ; PROVERBS, 2 vols., 21s. ; Sone oF SoLoMON AND EccLESIASTES, 10s. 6d. ; IsAIAH, Fourth Edition, rewritten, 2 vols., 21s. ; HEBREWS, 2 vols., 21s.
*.* Any Four Volumes may be had at original Subscription price of 21s. net.


4 T. and T. Clark's Publications.

Dictionary of the Bible, A. (See page 1.) Dillmann (Prof. A., D.D.)—GeEnEsIs: Critical and Exegetical Com- mentary. Two vols., 21s. Doedes—MANUAL OF NEW TESTAMENT HERMENEUTICS. Cr. 8vo, 3s. Déllinger (Dr.)—HIPPOLYTUS AND CALLISTUS. 8vo, 7s. 6d. DECLARATIONS AND LETTERS ON THE VATICAN DECREES, 1869-1887. Authorised Translation. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d. Dorner (Professor)—HIstToRY OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE PERSON OF CHRIST. Five vols. Subscription price, 26s. 3d. net. SysTEM OF CHRISTIAN DocTRINE. Subscription price, 21s. net. SysTEM OF CHRISTIAN ETHICS. 8vo, 14s.
Driver (Prof. 5. R., D.D.)—AN INTRODUCTION TO THE LITERATURE OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. (International Theological Library.) 7th Edition, post 8vo, 12s.
DrEUTERONOMY: A Critical and Exegetical Commentary. (International Critical Commentary.) Second Edition, post 8vo, 12s.
Drummond (R. J., D.D.)—THE RELATION OF THE APOSTOLIC TEACHING TO THE TEACHING OF CHRIST. Second Edition, 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Du Bose (Prof. W. P., D.D.)—THE EcuMENIcAL CouNCILS. (Eras of Church History.) 6s.
Duff (Prof. David, D.D.)—Tur Earty CHURCH. 8vo, 12s.
Dyke (Paul Van)—Tue AGE OF THE RENASCENCE. With an Intro- duction by Henry VAN Dyke. (ras of Church History.) 6s.
Eadie (Professor) COMMENTARIES ON ST. PAUL’S EPISTLES TO THE
EPHESIANS, PHILIPPIANS, CoLoss1Ans. New and Revised Editions, Edited by Rev. Wm. Younc, M.A. Three vols. 8vo, 10s, 6d. each ; 07) set, 188. net.
Ebrard (Dr. J. H. A.)—THE GosPEL History. 8vo, 10s. 6d. APpouLoGetTics. Three vols. 8vo, 915. 6d. COMMENTARY ON THE EPISTLES OF ST. JOHN. 8vo, 10s. 6d. Edgar pats D.D.)—TuHE GosPEL OF A RISEN SAviouR. Post 8vo,


"
75. θα, Elliott—On THE INSPIRATION OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURES. ὅνο, 6s.
Eras of the Christian Church— Now complete in Ten Volumes—
Du Boss (Prof. W. P., D.D.)—The Ecumenical Councils. 6s.
WatTERMAN (L., D.D.)—The Post-Apostolic Age. 6s.
Dyke (PAuL VANn)—The Age of the Renascence. 68.
Locke (Ciinton, D.D.)—The Age of the Great Western Schism. 6s.
Luptow (J. M., D.D.)—The Age of the Crusades. 68.
Vincent (Prof. M. R., D.D.)—The Age of Hildebrand. 68.
CiarK (Prof. W. R., LL.D., D.C.L.)—The Anglican Reformation. 6s.
WELts (Prof. C. L.)—The Age of Charlemagne. _ 6s.
BartTLeET (Prof. J. VerNon, M.A.)—The Apostolic Age. 68.
WALKER (Prof, W., Ph.D., D.D.)—The Protestant Reformation. 6s. Ernesti— BIBLICALINTERPRETATION OF NEWTESTAMENT. Two vols., 8s. Ewald (Heinrich)—HrEBREwW SyNTAX. 8vo, 8s. 6d.
REVELATION: Its Nature and Record. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
OLD AND NEw TESTAMENT THEOLOGY. 8vo, 10s. 6d. Expository Times. Edited by JAmes Hastincs, D.D. Monthly, 6d. Fairbairn (Prin.)—THE REVELATION oF LAW IN SCRIPTURE, 8vo, 10s. 6d.
EZEKIEL AND THE Book OF HIS PROPHECY. 4th Ed.,8vo, 10s. 6d.




Z. and T. Clark’s Publications. 5

Fairbairn (Prin.)—PropuEcy. Second Edition, 8vo, 10s. 6d. PASTORAL THEOLOGY. Crown 8vo, 6s.
Fairweather (Rev. W., M.A.)—OrIGEN AND GREEK PATRISTIC THEOLOGY. 85.
Falconer (J. W., B.D.)—From Apostle To Priest. A Study of
Early Church Organisation. Crown 8vo, 4s. 6d.
Fisher (Prof. 6. P., D.D., LL.D.)—Hisrory or CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE. (International Theological Library.) Second Edition, post 8vo, 12s. Forbes (Prof.)—SyMMETRICAL STRUCTURE OF SCRIPTURE. 8vo, 8s. 6d.
ANALYTICAL COMMENTARY ON RoMANS. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
STUDIES IN THE Book OF PSALMS. 8vo, 7s. 6d.
THE SERVANT OF THE LorD IN ISAIAH XL.-LXVI. Cr. 8vo, 5s. Foreign Theological Library—Four Volumes for One Guinea. De-
tailed List on application.
Forrest (D. W., D.D.)—TuHeE Curist oF History AND OF Ex- PERIENCE. Third Edition, post 8vo, 6s.
Frank (Prof. F. H.)—System or CHRISTIAN CERTAINTY. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Funcke (Otto)—Tue Wortp oF Faird AND THE EVERYDAY WORLD, As displayed in the Footsteps of Abraham. Post 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Garvie (Alex., B.D.)—Tur RITscHLIAN THEOLOGY. 8vo, 9s.
Gebhardt (H.)—Tur DocTRINE OF THE APOCALYPSE, AND ITS RELATION TO THE DOCTRINE OF THE GOSPEL AND EPISTLES OF JOHN. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Gerlach—CoMMENTARY ON THE PENTATEUCH. 8vo, 10s. 6d. Gieseler (Dr. J. C.L.)—EccLEstasticALHistory. Fourvols.8vo, £2, 2s. Gifford (Canon)—VoIcEs oF THE PROPHETS. Crown 8vyo, 3s. 6d.
Given (Rev. Prof. J. J. —Tue Trutu or SCRIPTURE IN CONNECTION WITH REVELATION, INSPIRATION, AND THE CANON. ὅνο, 6s.
Gladden (Washington, D.D., LL.D.) THe CurisTIAN PASTOR AND
THE WoRKING CHurcH. (International Theol. Library.) Post 8vo, 10s. 6d. Glasgow (Prof. )—A PocALYPSE TRANSLATED AND EXPOUNDED. 8vo, 10/6. Gloag (Paton J., D.D.)—THrE MESSIANIC PROPHECIES. Cr. 8vo, 7s. 6d. INTRODUCTION TO THE CATHOLIC EPISTLES. S8vo, 10s. 6d. EXEGETICAL STUDIES. Crown 8vo, ds.
INTRODUCTION TO THE SYNOPTIC GOSPELS. 8vo, 7s. 6d. THE PRIMEVAL WORLD. Crown 8vo, 3s. EvENING THOUGHTS. Crown 8vo, 4s.
Godet (Prof. F.)—Awn INTRODUCTION To THE NEW TESTAMENT— I. THe EpistLEs oF Sr. Pauu. 8vo, 12s. 6d. net. II. THE GosPpEL COLLECTION, AND ST. MATTHEW’s GOSPEL. 8vVvo, 6s. net.
COMMENTARY ON St. LUKE’S GOSPEL. Two vols. 8vo, 21s. COMMENTARY ON ST. JOHN’s GOSPEL. Three vols. 8vo, 31s. 6d. CoMMENTARY ON EPISTLE TO THE RoMANS. Two vols. 8vo, 21s. COMMENTARY ON 1ST EPISTLE TO CORINTHIANS. 2 vols. 8vo, 21s. ** Any Four Volumes at the original Subscription price of 21s. net. DEFENCE OF THE CHRISTIAN FAITH. Crown 8vo, 4s. Goebel (Siegfried) THE PARABLES OF JESUS. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Gotthold’s Emblems; or, INVISIBLE THINGS UNDERSTOOD BY THINGS THAT ARE MapgE. Crown 8vo, 5s.



6 T. and T. Clark's Publications.

Gould (Prof. E. P., D.D.)—Sr. Mark. (International Critical Commentary.) Post 8vo, 10s. 6d. Grimm’s GREEK-ENGLISH LEXICON OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. Trans- lated, Revised, and Enlarged by Jos—epH H. THAveEr, D.D. Demy 4to, 36s. Guyot (Arnold, LL.D.)—CREAtTIOoN; or, The Biblical Cosmogony in the Light of Modern Science. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo, 5s. 6d. Hagenbach (Dr. K. R.)—History or DocTRINES. 3 vols. 8vo, 31s. 6d. HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 2 vols. 8vo, 21s. Halcombe (Rev. J. J., M.A.)—Wuat THINK YE OF THE GOSPELS? A Handbook of Gospel Study. 8vo, 3s. 6d. Hall (Newman, D.D.)—Tue Lorp’s Prayer. Third Edition, crown 8vo, 4s. θα. GETHSEMANE; or, Leaves of Healing from the Garden of Grief. Second Edition, crown 8vo, 4s. DIVINE BROTHERHOOD. Third Edition, crown 8vo, 4s. Hamilton (T., D.D.)—BEYOND THE STARs; or, Heaven, its Inhabitants, Occupations, and Life. Third Edition, crown 8vo, 3s. 6d. Harless (Dr. C. A.)—SySTEM OF CHRISTIAN ETuHIcs. 8vo, 10s. 6d. Harris (S., D.D.)\—Gop TRE CREATOR AND LorD oF ALL. Two vols. post 8vo, 16s. Haupt (Erich)—TuHeE First EpIstLE oF St. JOHN. 8vo, 10s. 6d. Havernick (H. A. Ch.)—INTRODUCTION TO OLD TESTAMENT. 105. 6d. Heard (Rev. J. B., M.A.)—TuHeE TRIPARTITE NATURE OF MAN—SPIRIT. SovuL, AND Bopy. Fifth Edition, crown 8vo, 6s. OLD AND New THEOLOGY. AConstructiveCritique. Cr. 8vo, 6s. ALEXANDRIAN AND CARTHAGINIAN THEOLOGY CONTRASTED. The Hulsean Lectures, 1892-93. Crown 8vo, 6s. Hefele (Bishop)—A HisTtoRY OF THE COUNCILS OF THE CHURCH. Vol. I., to A.D. 825. Vol. II., A.D. 326 to 429. Vol. III., a.p. 431 to the close
of the Council of Chalcedon, 451. Vol. IV., a.p. 451 to 680. Vol. V., A.D. 626 to 787. 8vo, 12s. each.
Hengstenberg (Professor)—-COMMENTARY ON PSALMS, 8 vols. 8vo, 33s. ; ECCLESIASTES, ETC., 8vo, 9s. ; EZEKIEL, 8vo, 10s. 6d. ; THE GENUINENESS oF DANIEL, ETC., 8vo, 12s. ; History oF THE KINGDOM OF GoD, 2 vols. 8vo, 21s.; CHRISTOLOGY OF THE OLD TESTAMENT, 4 vols. 215. net; St. JOHN’S GOSPEL, 2 vols. 8vo, 21s.
** Any Four Volumes at the original Subscription price of 21s. net. Herkless (Prof. J., D.D.)—FRANcIS AND DomINIc. Crown 8vo, 3s. Herzog—ENcCYCLOPEDIA OF LIVING DIVINES, ETC., OF ALL DE-
NOMINATIONS IN EuROPE AND AMERICA. (Supplement to Herzog’s Encyclo- pedia.) Imp. 8vo, 8s.
Hill (Rev. J. Hamlyn, D.D.)—Tue Earuiest Lire oF CHRIST EVER COMPILED FROM THE Four Gosprets: Being ‘The Diatessaron of Tatian’ Literally Translated from the Arabic Version, and containing the Four Gospels woven into one Story. With an Historical and Critical Introduction, Notes, and Appendix. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
—— Sr. EPHRAEM THE SYRIAN. 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Hodgson (Principal J. M., M.A., D.Sc., D.D.)—THEOLOGIA PECTORIS: Outlines of Religious Faith and Doctrine. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.
Hutchison (John, D.D.)—CoMMENTARY ON THESSALONIANS. 8vo, 9s.
COMMENTARY ON PHILIPPIANS. 8vo, 7s. 6d. Our Lorv’s Sens IN St. JOHN’s GosPEL. Demy 8vo, 7s. 6d.





LT. and T. Clark's Publications. 7

Innes (A. D., M.A.)—CRANMER AND THE ENGLISH REFORMATION. Crown 8yo, 38.
Innes (A. Taylor)—TuHe TriaL or Jesus Curist. In its Legal Aspect. Post 8vo, 2s. 6d.
International Critical Commentary.
Driver (Prof. 5. R., D.D.)—Deuteronomy. 12s. Moore (Prof. G. F., D.D.)—Judges. 12s. SmiTu (Prof. H. P., D.D.)—Samuel. 12s. ΠΟ (ΕΠ Ὁ Hin .)—Proverbs. 12s. Goutp (Prof. E. P., D.D.)—St. Mark. 10s. 6d. PLUMMER (ALFRED, D.D.)—St. Luke. 12s. Sanpay (Prof. W., D.D.) and Heapiam (A. C., B.D.)—Romans. 19s. ΑΒΒΟΤΊ (Prof. T. K., B.D., D.Lit.)—Ephesians and Colossians. 10s, 6d. VINCENT (Prof. M. R., D.D.)—Philippians and Philemon. 858. 6d. Brae (Prof. C., D.D.)—St. Peter and St. Jude. 10s. 6d.
For List of future Volumes see p. 15.
International Theological Library. Driver (Prof. 5. R., D.D.)—An Introduction to the Literature of the Old Testament. 12s. SmytH (Newman, D.D.)—Christian Ethics. 10s. 6d. Bruce (Prof. A. B., D.D.)—Apologetics. 10s. 6d. FisHEr (Prof. G. P., D.D., LL.D.)—History of Christian Doctrine. 12s. ALLEN (Prof. A. V. G., D.D.)—Christian Institutions. 12s. McGtrrert (Prof. A. C., Ph.D.)—The Apostolic Age. 12s. GLADDEN (Washington, D.D.)—The Christian Pastor. 10s. 6d. STEVENS (Prof. G. B., D.D.)—The Theology of the New Testament. 12s. Ratny (Prin. R.)—The Ancient Catholic Church. 12s. For List of future Volumes see p. 14.
Janet (Paul)—Finat Causes. Second Edition, demy 8vo, 12s.
THE THEORY oF Moras. Demy 8vo, 10s. θα. Johnstone (P. De Lacy, M.A.)—MuHAMMAD AND HIS PowER. 95. Johnstone (Prof. R., D.D.)—CoMMENTARY ON 1ST PETER. 8vo, 10s. 6d. Jones (E. E. C.)—ELemMeEnts oF Logic. 8vo, 7s. 6d. Jouffroy—PHILOSOPHICAL Essays. Fcap. 8vo, 5s.
Kaftan (Prof. J., D.D.)—Tur Truru oF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION. Authorised Translation. 2 vols. 8vo, 16s. net.
Kant—Tue Merapnysic or Eruics. Crown 8vo, 6s. PHILOSOPHY OF Law. Trans. by W. HastIE, D.D. Cr. 8vo, 5s. PRINCIPLES OF PoLitics, ETC. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.
Keil (Prof.)—PENTATEUCH, 3 vols. 8vo, 815. 6d.; JoSHUA, JUDGES, AND RuTH, 8vo, 10s. 6d. ; SAMUEL, 8vo, 10s. 6d. ; Kines, 8vo, 10s. 6d.; CHRONICLES, 8yo, 10s. 6d.; Ezra, NEHEMIAH, EsTHER, 8vo, 10s. 6d. ; JEREMIAH, 2 vols. 8vo, 215. ; EZEKIEL, 2 vols. 8vo, 21s.; DANIEL, 8vo, 10s. 6d.; Minor PropHets, 2 vols. 8vo, 21s. ; INTRODUCTION TO THE CANONICAL SCRIPTURES OF THE OLD TESTAMENT, 2 vols. 8vo, 218. ; HANDBOOK OF BIBLICAL ARCHHOLOGY, 2 vols. 8vo, 21s.
** Any Four Volumes at the original Subscription price of 21s. net.
Keymer (Rev. N., M.A.)—NorteEs oN GENESIS. Crown 8vo, 15. 6d. Kidd (James, D.D.)—Moratiry AND RELIGION. 8vo, 10s. 6d. Killen (Prof.)—THE FRAMEWORK OF THE CHURCH. 8vo, 9s.
THE OLD CATHOLIC CHURCH. 8vo, 9s.
THE IGNATIAN EPISTLES ENTIRELY SPURIOUS. Cr. 8vo, 2s. 6d. Kilpatrick (Prof. T. B., D.D.)—CuHRIsTIAN CHARACTER. 2s. θα.
D .D D
——— τ ͵ὯὃὯὮὃἝὃἝὃἝὃὲ

SS eth

8 T. and T. Clark's Publications.

Konig (Dr. Ed.)—Tue ExInes’ Book oF CoNnsoLATION (Deutero-Isaiah). Crown ὅνο, 8s. 6d.
Konig (Dr. F. E.)—THE REticious History oF IsRAEL. Cr. 8vo, 3s. 6d. Krause (F. C. F.)—TuHe IpEaL or HuMANITy. Crown 8vo, 3s. Krummacher (Dr. F. W.)—THE SUFFERING Saviour ; or, Meditations on the Last Days of the Sufferings of Christ. Eighth Edition, crown 8vo, 6s. Davin, THE KinG oF IsraEL. Second Edition, cr. 8vo, 6s. AUTOBIOGRAPHY. Crown 8vo, 6s. Kurtz (Prof.)—HanpbBook oF CuurcH History (from 1517). 8vo,7s. 6d. HISTORY OF THE OLD CovENANT. Three vols. 8vo, 31s. 6d. Ladd (Prof. G. T.)—THr DocTRINE oF SACRED SCRIPTURE: A
Critical, Historical, and Dogmatic Inquiry into the Origin and Nature of the Old and New Testaments. Two vols. 8vo, 1600 pp., 24s.
Laidlaw (Prof. J., D.D.)—Tuer BipLte Doctrine oF ΜΑΝ; or, The
Anthropology and Psychology of Scripture. New Edition Revised and Rearranged, post 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Lane (Laura M.)—Lire oF ALEXANDER VINET. Crown ὅνο, 7s. 6d. Lange (J. P., D.D.)—THE LIFE oF ouR Lorp JESUS CHRIST. Edited by Marcus Dons, D.D. 2nd Ed., in 4 vols. 8vo, price 28s. net. COMMENTARIES ON THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS. Edited by Partie Scuarr, D.D. Oxp TESTAMENT, 14 vols. ; NEw TESTAMENT, 10 vols. ; ApocrypHA, 1 vol. Subscription price, net, 15s. each. St. MATTHEW AND 51. Mark, 3 vols. 8vo, 31s. 6d.; St. LUKE, 2 vols. 8vo, 18s.; St. JoHN, 2 vols. 8vo, 21s. *,* Any Four Volumes at the original Subscription price of 21s. net.
Le Camus (E., Bishop of La Rochelle) —THE CHILDREN OF NAZARETH. Feap. 4to. 4s.
Lechler (Prof. G. V., D.D.)—Tur AposToLic AND Post-APOSTOLIC Times. Their Diversity and Unity in Life and Doctrine. 2 vols. cr. 8vo, 16s.
Lehmann (Pastor)—ScENES FROM THE LIFE OF JESUS. Cr. 8vo, 3s. 6d.
Lewis (Tayler, LL.D.)—Tur Srx Days or CrEaTION. Cr. 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Lilley (J. P., M.A.)—Tue Lorn’s Supper: Its Origin, Nature, and Use. Crown 8vo, 5s.
THe Pastorau EPISTLES. 95. 6d.
PRINCIPLES OF PROTESTANTISM. 25. 6d.
Lillie (Arthur, M.A.)—BuppHA AND BuppHISM. Crown 8vo, 3s.
Lindsay (Prof. T. M., D.D.)—LurHER AND THE GERMAN REFORMA- TION. Crown 8vo, 8s.
Lisco (F. G.)—PARABLES OF JESUS EXPLAINED. Feap. 8vo, 5s.
Locke (Clinton, D.D.)—THr AGE oF THE GREAT WESTERN SCHISM. (Eras of Church History.) 6s.
Lotze (Hermann)—Microcosmus: An Essay concerning Man and his relation to the World. Cheaper Edition, 2 vols. 8vo (1450 pp.), 24s.
Ludlow (J. M., D.D.)—THEe AGE OF THE CRUSADES. (Eras of Church History.) 6s.
Luthardt, Kahnis, and Briickner—THE CHURCH. Crown 8vo, 5s.
_ Luthardt (Prof.)—Svr. ΘΟῊΝ THE AUTHOR OF THEFOURTH GOSPEL. 7s.6d.
COMMENTARY ON ST. JOHN’S GOSPEL. 3 vols. 8vo, 31s. 6d.
HIsToRY OF CHRISTIAN EruHics. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
APOLOGETIC LECTURES ON THE FUNDAMENTAL (7 Ed.), SAVING (5 Ed.), Moran Trutus or Curistranity (4 Zd.). 38 vols. er. 8vo, 6s. each.







T. and T. Clark's Publications. 9


Macdonald—InrTRoDUCTION TO PENTATEUCH. ‘Two vols. 8vo, 21s. THE CREATION AND FALL. 8vo, 12s. Macgregor (Rev. Jas., D.D.)— THE APoLoGY OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 8vo, 10s. 6d. THE REVELATION AND THE RECORD: Essays on Matters of Previous Question in the Proof of Christianity. ὅνο, 75. 6d. STUDIES IN THE History oF NEw TESTAMENT APOLOGETICS. 8vo, 7s. 6d. Macgregor (Rev. G. H. C.,|M.A.)—So Great SALVATION. Cr. 32mo, 15. Macpherson (Rev. John, M.A.)—CoMMENTARY ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. 8vo, 10s. 6d. CHRISTIAN DogMaTIcs. Post 8vo, 9s. McCosh (James), Life of. ὅνο, 9s. McGiffert (Prof. A. C., Ph.D.)—Hisrory oF CHRISTIANITY IN THE AposroLic AGE. (International Theological Library.) Post Svo, 12s. M‘Hardy (6. D.D.)—SavonaroLa. Crown 8vo, 3s. M‘Intosh (Rev. Hugh, M.A.)—Is Curist INFALLIBLE AND THE BIBLE TruE? Second Edition, post 8vo, 9s. M‘Realsham (E. D.)—Romans Dissecrep. A Critical Analysis of the Epistle to the Romans. Crown 8vo, 2s. Mair (A., D.D.)—Srtupies IN THE CHRISTIAN EVIDENCES. Third Edition, Revised and Enlarged, crown 8vo, 6s. Martensen (Bishop)—CuristTIAN Doematics. 8vo, 10s. 6d. CHRISTIAN ErHics. (GENERAL — INDIVIDUAL — SOCIAL.) Three vols. 8vo, 10s. 6d. each. Matheson (Geo., D.D.)—GRowTH OF THE SPIRIT OF CHRISTIANITY, from the First Century to the Dawn of the Lutheran Era. Two vols. 8vo, 21s. Meyer (Dr.)— CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL COMMENTARIES ON THE New TESTAMENT. Twenty vols. 8vo. Subscription price, £5, 5s. net ; selection of Four Volumes at Subscription price of 21s.; Non-Subscription price, 10s. 6d. each volume. St. Marruew, 2 vols.; Mark anp LuKgE, 2 vols.; Sr. JouHn, 2 vols. ; Acts, 2 vols.; RomAns, 2 vols. ; CORINTHIANS, 2 vols.; GALATIANS, one vol. ; EPHESIANS AND PHILEMON, one vol.; PHILIPPIANS AND COLOSSIANS, one vol. ; THESSALONIANS (Dr. Liinemann), one vol. ; THE PASTORAL EpisTLEs (Dr.
Huther), one vol.; Hrprews (Dr. Liinemann), one vol. ; St. JAMES AND Sv. JOHN’S Episties (Huther), one vol. ; PETER AND JUDE (Dr. Huther), one vol.
Michie (Charles, M.A.)—BrisL—E WorDS AND PHRASES. 18mo, 15. Milligan (George, B.D.)—Tur THEOLOGY OF THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS. Post 8vo, 6s.
Milligan (Prof. W., D.D.)—THE RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD. Second Edition, crown 8vo, 4s. 6d.
Milligan (Prof. W., D.D.) and Moulton (W. F., D.D.) — Com- MENTARY ON THE GOSPEL OF St. JoHN. Imp. 8vo, 9s.
Moffatt (James, B.D.)—Tue HistoricAL NEw TESTAMENT. Second Edition, demy 8vo, 16s.
Monrad (Dr. D. G.)—THE WorLD oF PRAYER. Crown ὅνο, 4s. 6d.
Moore (Prof. G. F., D.D.)—JupeEs. (International Critical Com- mentary.) Second Edition, post 8vo, 12s. ;
Morgan (J., D.D.)—ScripTuRE TESTIMONY TO THE HOLy Spirit. 7s. 6d.
EXPOSITION OF THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 8vo, 7s. 6d.


ΙΟ T. and T. Clark's Publications.
Moulton (W. F., D.D.) and Geden (A. S8., M.A.)—A CoNCORDANCE
TO THE GREEK TESTAMENT. Crown 4to, 26s. net, and 31s. 6d. net. Muir (Sir W.)—MoHAMMEDAN CoNnTROVERSY, Etc. 8vo, 7s. 6d. Miller (Dr. Julius)—TueE CHRISTIAN DocTRINE OF SIN. 2 vols. 8vo, 21s. Murphy (Professor)—CoMMENTARY ON THE PSALMS. 8vo, 12s. —— A CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL COMMENTARY ON ExoDUS. 95. Naville (Ernest)—THE PROBLEM OF EviIL. Crown 8vo, 4s. 6d. ——— TuHeECurRIsT. Translated by Rev. T.J.DEsprus. Cr. 8vo, 4s. 6d. MopeErN Puysics. Crown 8vo, 5s. Neander (Dr.)—CuurcH History. Eight vols. 8vo, £2, 2s. net. Nicoll (W. Robertson, M.A., LL.D.)—THE INCARNATE SAVIOUR. Cheap Edition, price 3s. 6d. Novalis—HyMNs AND THOUGHTS ON RELIGION. Crown 8vo, 4s. Oehler (Prof.)—THEOLOGY OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 2 vols. 8vo, 21s. Olshausen (Dr. H.)—BiIBLICAL COMMENTARY ON THE GOSPELS AND Acts. Fourvols., 21s. net. Crown 8vo Edition, four vols., 24s.
RoMANS, one vol. 8vo, 10s. 6d. ; CORINTHIANS, one vol. 8vo, 9s. ; PHILIPPIANS, TITUS, AND First T1MoTHY, one vol. 8vo, 10s, 6d. Oosterzee (Dr. Van)—Tur YEAR OF SALVATION. 2 vols. 8vo, 6s. each.
—— Mosss: A Biblical Study. Crown 8vo, 6s.
Orelli (Dr. C. von)—OLp TESTAMENT PROPHECY ; COMMENTARY ON IsAIAH ; JEREMIAH ; THE TWELVE Minor PropHets. 4 vols. Subscription price, 21s. net ; separate vols., 10s. 6d. each.
Owen (Dr. John)—Works. Best and only Complete Edition. Edited
by Rev. Dr. Gootp. Twenty-four vols. 8vo, Subscription price, £4, 4s. The ‘ Hebrews’ may be had separately, in seven vols., £2, 2s. net.
Palestine, Map of. Edited by J. G. BARTHOLOMEW, F.R.G.S., and Prof. G. A. Smiru, M.D., D.D. With complete Index. Scale—4 Miles to an Inch.
Philippi (F. A.)—CoMMENTARY ON THE Romans. ‘Two vols. 8vo, 21s.
Piper—LiveEs OF LEADERS OF CHURCH UNIVERSAL. Twovols. 8vo, 21s.
Popular Commentary on the New Testament. Kdited by PHILIP Scuarr, D.D. With Illustrations and Maps. Vol. I.—THE SynNopricaL GospEets. Vol. 11.--ϑτ. JoHN’s GOSPEL, AND THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. Vol. IIIL.—Romans To PuitEMon. Vol. 1V.—HEBREWS TO REVELATION. In four vols. imperial 8vo, 12s. 6d. each.
Plummer (Alfred, D.D.)—Sr. Luke.  (Jnternational Critical Com- mentary.) Second Edition, post 8vo, 12s.
Pressensé (Edward de)—TuHE REDEEMER: Discourses. Crown 8vo, 6s.
Piinjer (Bernhard)—HisTtory OF THE CHRISTIAN PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION FROM THE REFORMATION TO KANT. 8vo, 16s.
Rabiger (Prof.)—ENCYCLOPADIA OF THEOLOGY. Two vols. 8vo, 21s. Rainy (Principal) — DELIVERY AND DEVELOPMENT OF CHRISTIAN DocTRINE. 8vo, 10s. 6d. THE ANCIENT CaTHoLIC CHURCH. (International Theo- logical Library). Post 8vo, 12s. Reusch (Prof.)—NATURE AND THE BIBLE: Lectures on the Mosaic History of Creation in relation to Natural Science. Two vols, 8vo, 21s. Reuss (Professor)—HIsTORY OF THE SACRED SCRIPTURES OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 640 pp. 8vo, 15s.


ZT. and T. Clark's Publications. ΤΙ

Riehm (Dr. Ἐ.)--- ΜΈΒΘΙΑΝΙΟ Propuecy. New Edition. Post 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Ritschl (Albrecht, D.D.)—Tur CuristiAN Docrrine oF JUSTIFI- CATION AND RECONCILIATION. 8vo, 14s.
Ritter (Carl) —ComparaTIvE GEOGRAPHY OF PALESTINE. 4 vols. 8vo, 21s. Robinson (Rev. S., D.D.)—DiscouRsEs ΟΝ REDEMPTION. 8vo, 7s. θά. Robinson (E., D.D.)—GrerEk AND ENG. LEXICON oF THE N.TEST. 8vo,9s. Rooke (T. G., B.A.)—InsprraTIon, and other Lectures. 8vo, 7s. 6d. Ross (C.)—Our Fatuer’s Kinepom. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.
Rothe (Prof.)—SERMONS FOR THE CHRISTIAN YEAR. Cr. 8vo, 4s. 6d. Saisse-—MANUAL OF MODERN PANTHEISM. Two vols. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Salmond (Princ. 8. ἢ. F., D.D.)—Tue Curistian DOCTRINE OF ImMoRTALITY. New Edition, post 8vo, 9s.
Sanday (Prof. W., D.D.) and Headlam (A. C., B.D.)—Romans. (International Critical Commentary.) Third Edition, post 8vo, 12s.
Sartorius (Dr. E.)—Docrrine oF Divine Love. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Schaff (Professor)—HistoryY oF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH. (New
Edition, thoroughly Revised and Enlarged.) Six ‘Divisions,’ in 2 vols. each, extra 8vo.
1, APOSTOLIC CHRISTIANITY, A.D. 1-100, 2 vols. 21s. 2. ANTE-NICENE, A.D. 100-325, 2 vols., 21s. 3. NIcENE AND Post-NICENE, A.D. 325-600, 2 vols., 21s. 4. MEDIMVAL, A.D. 590-1073, 2 vols., 21s. (Completion of this Period, 1073-1517, in preparation). 5. THE Swiss REFORMATION, 2 vols., extra demy 8vo, 21s. 6. THE GERMAN REFORMATION, 2 vols., extra demy ὅγο, 21s.
Schleiermacher’s CHristMAS Eve. Crown 8vo, 2s.
Schubert (Prof. H. Von., D.D.)—Tuxr Gospet oF St. PETER. Synoptical Tables. With Translation and Critical Apparatus. 8vo, 1s. 6d. net. Schultz (Hermann)—O.p TESTAMENT THEOLOGY. Two vols. 18s. net.
Schirer (Prof.)— History OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE. 5 vols. Subscrip- tion price, 26s. 3d. net. *,.” Index. In separate Volume. 2s. 6d. net.
Schwartzkopff (Dr. P.)—Tur PRoPHECIES oF JESUS CHRIST. Crown 8vo, 5s.
Scott (Jas., M.A., D.D.)—PrincipLes oF NEw TESTAMENT QUOTATION ESTABLISHED AND APPLIED TO BIBLICAL CRITICISM. Cr. 8vo, 2nd Edit., 4s.
Sell (K., D.D.)—Tur CHURCH IN THE Mirror OF History. Cr. 8vo, 3/6. Shedd—HIstTory or CHRISTIAN DoctTRINE. Two vols. 8vo, 21s. SERMONS TO THE NATURAL MAN. ὅνο, 7s. θα. SERMONS TO THE SPIRITUAL MAN. 8vo, 7s. 6d. Dogmatic THEOLOGY. ‘Three vols. ex. 8vo, 37s. 6d.
Sime (James, M.A.)— WILLIAM HERSCHEL AND HIS WorRK. Cr. 8vo, 3s. Simon (Prof. )—TueE Brste; An Outgrowth of Theocratic Life. Cr.8vo, 4/6. RECONCILIATION BY INCARNATION. Post 8vo, 7s. 6d. Skene-Bickell—THE Lorp’s SuPPER & THE PASSOVER RITUAL. 8νο, 5s.
Smeaton (Oliphant, M.A.)—TuHr ΜΈΡΙΟΙ AND THE ITALIAN RENAIS- SANCE. 3s.
Smeaton (Professor)— DocTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 2nd Ed., 8vo, 9s. Smith (Prof. H. P., D.D.)—I. anp II. SAMUEL. (International Critical
Commentary.) Post 8vo, 12s.



12 T. and T. Clark’s Publications.
Smith (Professor Thos., D.D.)—Mrp1avau Missions. Cr. ὅνο, 4s. 6d. Smyth (John, M.A., D.Ph.)—TrutTH anp REALITY. Crown 8vo, 4s.
Smyth (Newman, D.D.)—Curistian Eruics. (International Theo- logical Library.) Third Edition, post 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Snell (F. J., M.A.)—WeEsLEY AND METHODISM. Crown 8vo, 3s.
Somerville (Rev. D., D.D.)—Sr. PAUL’s CONCEPTION OF CHRIST. 95.
Stahlin (Leonh.)—Kant, Lotze, AND RITSCHL. 8vo, 9s.
Stalker (Jas., D.D.)—LireorCurist. Large Type Ed., cr. 8vo, 3s. 6d. LiFe oF St. Pauu. Large Type Edition, crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.
Stanton (V. H., D.D.)—Tur Jewish AND THE CHRISTIAN MESSIAH. A Study in the Earliest History of Christianity. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Stead (F. H.)—Tur Kincpom oF Gop. 15. 6d. Steinmeyer (Dr. F. L.)—TuHre Mrracies oF our Lord. ὅνο, 7s. θά.
THE HISTORY OF THE PASSION AND RESURRECTION OF OUR LorD, considered in the Light of Modern Criticism. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Stevens (Prof. G. B., D.D.)—Tue THEoLoGcy oF THE NEw TESTAMENT. (International Theological Library.) Post 8vo, 12s.
Stevenson (Mrs.)—THE SYMBOLIC PARABLES. Crown 8vyo, 3s. 6d. Steward (Rev. G.)—MEDIATORIAL SOVEREIGNTY. Two vols. 8vo, 21s. THE ARGUMENT OF THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS. 8vo, 10s.6d.
Stier (Dr. Rudolph)—On THE WorpDs oF THE LorpD JEsus. LEight vols. 8vo, Subscription price of £2, 2s. Separate volumes, price 10s. 6d.
THE WORDS OF THE RISEN SAVIOUR, AND COMMENTARY ON THE EPISTLE OF ST. JAMES. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
THE WORDS OF THE APOSTLES EXPOUNDED. 8vo, 10s. 6d. Stirling (Dr. J. Hutchison)—PHILosopHy AND THEOLOGY. Post 8vo, 9s. DARWINIANISM: Workmen and Work. Post 8vo, 10s. 6d. WHAT ss THOUGHT? 8vo, 10s. 6d. Tholuck (Prof.)—TuHE EPISTLE ΤΟ THE RoMANS. Two vols. feap. 8vo, 8s.
Thomson (J. E. H. D.D.)—Booxs wuicH INFLUENCED ouR LorD AND His AposTLEs. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Thomson (Rev. ἘΝ. A.)—MEMORIALS OF A MINISTRY. Crown 8vo, 5s.
Tophel (Pastor G.)—THE Work OF THE Hoty Spirit. Cr. 8vo, 2s. 6d.
Toy (Prof. C. H., D.D.)—PRoverss. (International Critical Com- mentary.) Post 8vo, 12s.
Troup (Rev. G. Elmslie, M.A..—Worps To YouNG CHRISTIANS: Being Addresses to Young Communicants. On antique laid paper, chaste binding, fcap. 8vo, 4s. 6d.
Uhlhorn(G.)—CHRISTIAN CHARITYIN THEANCIENTCHURCH. Cr. 8vo, 6s.
Ullmann (Dr. Carl)—REFORMERS BEFORE THE REFORMATION, princi- pally in Germany and the Netherlands. Two vols. 8vo, 21s.
Urwick (W., M.A.)—THE SERVANT oF JEHOVAH: A Commentary upon Isaiah 111. 13-liii. 12; with Dissertations upon Isaiah xl.-Ixvi. 8vo, 3s.




T. and T. Clark's Publications. h3

Vinet (Life and Writings of). By L. M. LANE. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d. Vincent (Prof. M. R., D.D.)—Tur Ace or HILDEBRAND. (ras of Church History.) 6s. PHILIPPIANS AND PHILEMON. (International Critical Com- mentary.) Post 8vo, 8s. 6d. Walker (James, of Carnwath)—Essays, PAPERS, AND SERMONS. Post Svo, 6s.
Walker (J., D.D.)—THEOLOGY AND THEOLOGIANS OF SCOTLAND. New Edition, crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.
Walker (Prof. W., D.D.)—TueE PRoTEsTANT REFORMATION. (Eras of Church History.) 6s. Walker (Rev. W. L.)—THE SpiriIT AND THE INCARNATION. Second Edition, 8vo, 9s. Warfield (B. B., D.D.)—Tue Ricut or Systematic THEOLOGY. Crown 8yo, 2s. Waterman (L., D.D.)—TueE Post-AposTotic AcE. (Hras of Church History.) 6s. Watt (W. A., M.A., D.Ph.)—Tue THEory or ConTRACT IN ITS SOCIAL LicuT. 8vo, 3s. A Srupy oF SoctaL Moratity. Post 8vo, 6s. Watts (Professor)—THre NEWER CRITICISM AND THE ANALOGY OF THE Fairy. Third Edition, crown 8vo, 5s. Ture RecN or Causauity: A Vindication of the Scientific Principle of Telic Causal Efficiency. Crown 8vo, 6s. Tur New APoLoceEtic. Crown 8vo, 6s. Weir (J.F., M.A.)—Tue Way : THE NATUREAND MEANS OF SALVATION. Ex. crown 8vo, 6s. 6d. Weiss (Prof. )—BriBsLicAL THEOLOGY OF NEWTESTAMENT. 2 vols. 8vo, 21s. Lire oF Curist. Three vols. 8vo, 31s. 6d. Welch (Rev. A. C., B.D.)—ANSELM AND HIS WorK. 95. Wells (Prof. C. L.)—THr AGE OF CHARLEMAGNE. (Eras of the Christian Church.) 6s. Wendt (H. H., D.D.)—Tur TEACHING oF JESUS. 2 vols. 8vo, 21s. Wenley (R. M.)—ConTEMPORARY THEOLOGY AND THEISM. Crown 8vo, 4s. 6d. White (Rev. M.)—SympoicaL NUMBERS OF SCRIPTURE. Cr. 8vo, 4s. Williams (E. F., D.D.)—CuRISTIAN LIFE IN GERMANY. Crown 8vo, 5s. Wilson (5. Law, D.D.)—THe THroLocy or MODERN LITERATURE. Post 8vo, 7s. 6d. Winer (Dr. G. B.)—A TREATISE ON THE GRAMMAR OF New ΤΈΒΤΑ-
MENT GREEK, regarded as the Basis of New Testament Exegesis. Third Edition, edited by W. F. Mouton, D.D. Ninth English Edition, 8vo, 15s.
Witherow(Prof.T.,D.D.)—THE ForMOFrTHECHRISTIAN TEMPLE. 8vo,10/6. Woods (F. H., B.D.)—THE Hope oF IsRAEL. Crown 8vo, 3s. θα.
Workman (Prof. G. C.)—Tue TEXT OF JEREMIAH; or, A Critical Investi- gation of the Greek and Hebrew, etc. Post 8vo, 9s.
Wright (C. H., D.D.)—Bisiican Essays. Crown 8vo, 5s.

πο τσ π᾿ τ Ὁ  - --------ς-ς--ς---------

14
7. and 7. Clark's Publications.

THE INTERNATIONAL THEOLOGICAL LIBRARY.

Tue following eminent Scholars have contributed, or are
engaged upon, the Volumes named :—
An Introduction to the Literature of the Old Testament.
Christian Ethics.
Apologetics.
History of Christian Doctrine.
A History of Christianity in the Apostolic Age.
Christian Institutions.
The Christian Pastor.
Theology of the New Testament.
The Ancient Catholic Church. Theology of the Old Testament.
The Literature of the New Testament.
Old Testament History.
Canon and Text of the New Testament. The Latin Church.
Encyclopedia.
Contemporary History of the Old Testa- ment.
Contemporary History of the New Testa- ment.
Philosophy of Religion.
The Study of the Old Testament.
Rabbinical Literature.
The Life of Christ.
The Christian Preacher.
By S. R. Driver, D.D., Regius Professor of Hebrew, and Canon of Christ Church, Oxford. [Seventh Edition. 12s.
By Newman Smytu, D.D., Pastor of the First Congregational Church, New Haven, Conn. [Third Edition. tos. 6d.
By the late A. B. Bruce, D.D., Professor of New Testament Exegesis, Free Church College, Glasgow. [Third Edition. tos. 6d.
By G. P. Fisner, D.D., LL.D., Professor of Ecclesiastical History, Yale University, New Haven, Conn. [Second Edition. 12s.
By ARTHUR CusHMAN McGIFFERT, Ph.D.,
D.D., Professor of Church History, Union Theological Seminary, New York. [125.
By A. V. G. ALLen, D.D., Professor of Ecclesiastical History, Episcopal Theo- logical School, Cambridge, Mass. [r2s.
By WasHINGTON GLADDEN, D.D., Pastor of Congregational Church, Columbus, Ohio. {zos. 6d.
By GeorcE B. STEvENs, Ph.D., D.D., Pro- fessor of Systematic Theology in Yale University, U.S.A. [τ25.
By Rosert Rainy, D.D., Principal of The New College, Edinburgh. τ25.
By A. B. Davipson, D.D., LL.D., Professor of Hebrew, The New College, Edinburgh.
By S. D. F. Satmonp, D.D., Principal, and Professor of Systematic Theology and New Testament Exegesis, United Free Church College, Aberdeen.
By H. P. Smirn, D.D., late Professor of Biblical History and _ Interpretation, Amherst College, U.S.A.
By Caspar ReENf£ Grecory, Ph.D., Pro- fessor in the University of Leipzig.
By ARCHIBALD ROBERTSON, D.D., Principal of King’s College, London.
By C. A. Brices, D.D., Professor of Biblical Theology, Union Theological Seminary, New York.
By Francis Brown, D.D., Professor of Hebrew and Cognate Languages, Union Theological Seminary, New York.
By Frank Ὁ. Porter, Ph.D., Yale Uni- versity, New Haven, Conn.
By Ropert Fiint, D.D., LL.D., Professor of Divinity in the University of Edinburgh.
By the Right Rev. H. E. Rye, D.D., Lord Bishop of Exeter.
By S. SCHECHTER, M.A., Readerin Talmudic in the University of Cambridge.
3y WiLLt1AM Sanpay, D.D., LL.D., Lady Margaret Professor of Divinity, and Canon of Christ Church, Oxford.
By Joun Watson, D.D. (‘Ian Mac-
LAREN ’), Sefton Park Presbyterian Church of England, Liverpool.
T. and T. Clark's Publications. is

THE INTERNATIONAL CRITICAL COMMENTARY,
TEN VOLUMES NOW READY, viz. :—
Deuteronomy, Judges, I. and II. Samuel, Proverbs, 5. Mark, 5. Luke, Romans, Ephesians and Colossians, Philippians and Philemon, 5. Peter and 5. Jude.
The following other Volumes are in course of preparation :-—
Genesis.
Exodus. Leviticus.
Numbers. Joshua. Kings. Isaiah. Jeremiah.
Minor Prophets. Psalms.
Job. Daniel. Ezra and Nehemiah.
Chronicles.
Synopsis of the Four Gospels.
Matthew.
Acts. Corinthians. Galatians.
The Pastoral Epistles.
Hebrews.
James.
The Johannine Epistles.
Revelation.
THE OLD TESTAMENT.
T. K. Caeyne, D.D., Oriel Professor of the Interpretation of Holy Scripture, Oxford, and Canon of Rochester.
A. R. 5. Kennepy, D.D., Professor of Hebrew, University of Edinburgh.
J. F. Srennine, M.A., Fellow of Wadham College, Oxford ; and the late Rev. H. A. White, M.A., Fellow of New College, Oxford.
G. BucHaNnan Gray, M.A., Lecturer in Hebrew, Mansfield College, Oxford.
Grorce ApAM SmitH, D.D., Professor of Hebrew, United Free Church College, Glasgow.
Francis Brown, D.D., Professor of Hebrew and Cognate Languages, Union Theological Seminary, New York.
A. B. Davipson, D.D., LL.D., Professor of Hebrew, New College, Edinburgh.
A. F. Kirkpatrick, D.D., Regius Professor of Hebrew, and Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge.
W. R. Harper, Ph.D., President of Chicago University.
C. A. Brices, D.D., Edward Robinson Professor of Biblical Theology, Union Theological Seminary, New York.
S. R. Driver, D.D., Regius Professor of Hebrew, Oxford.
Rev. Joun P. Peters, Ph.D., late Professor of Hebrew, P. ἘΠ. Divinity School, Philadelphia, now Rector of St. Michael’s Church, New York City.
Rey. L. W. Barren, Ph.D., Professor of Hebrew, P. E. Divinity School, Philadelphia.
Epwarp L. Curtis, D.D., Professor of Hebrew, Yale University, New Haven, Conn.
THE NEW TESTAMENT.
W. Sanpay, D.D., LL.D., Lady Margaret Professor of Divinity, Oxford ; and Rev. W. C. ALLEN, M.A., Exeter College, Oxford.
Rev. WiLLoucuHBy C. ALLEN, M.A., Chaplain, Fellow, and Lecturer in Theology and Hebrew, Exeter College, Oxford.
FREDERICK H. Cuase, D.D., Christ’s College, Cambridge. ArcH. RoBertson, D.D., Principal of King’s College, London.
Rev. Ernest D. Burton, A.B., Professor of New Testament Literature, University of Chicago.
Water Lock, D.D., Dean Ireland’s Professor of Exegesis, Oxford. Rey. A. Narrneg, M.A., Professor of Hebrew in King’s College, London.
Rey. James H. Ropes, A.B., Instructor in New Testament Criticism in Harvard University.
S. D. F. Satmonp, D.D., Principal, and Professor of Systematic Theology, United Free Church College, Aberdeen.
Rosert H. Cuarwes, D.D., Professor of Biblical Greek in the University of Dublin.
Other engagements will be announced shortly.
16 7. and T. Clark's Publications.

Che World’s Epoch-Iakers
Edited by OLIPHANT SMEATON.

Messrs. T. ἃ T. CLARK have much pleasure in announcing that they have commenced the publication of an important new Series, under the above title.
The following Volumes have now been issued ;—
Buddha and Buddhism. By ARTHUR Lik, M.A.
Luther and the German Reformation. By Professor T. M. Linpsay, D.D.
Wesley and Methodism. By F. J. SNELL, M.A.
Cranmer and the English Reforma- tion. By A. D. Innzs, M.A.
William Herschel and his Work. By JAmEs Sime, M.A.
Muhammad and his Power.
Francis and Dominic. J. HeRK LESS, D.D.
By Professor
Savonarola. By G. M‘Harpy, D.D. Anselm and his Work. By Rev. A. C, Wxtcu, B.D.
The Medici and the Italian Renais- sance. By OLIPHANT SMEATON, M.A., Edinburgh.
Origen and Greek Patristic Theology. By Rev. W. FAIRWEATHER, M.A.
By P. Dr Lacy Jounstoneg, M.A.(Oxon.),.
The following have also been arranged for :—
Socrates. By Rey. J. T. Forsss, M.A., Glasgow. Plato. By Professor ἢ), G. RircHin,
M.A., University of St. Andrews.
Marcus Aurelius and the Later Stoics. By F. W. Busszut, D.D., Vice-Principal of Brasenose College, Oxford.
Augustine and Latin Patristic Theo- logy. D.D., Princeton.
Scotus Erigena and his Epoch. By Professor RK. Larra; (Phe ἢ, DSe., University of Aberdeen.
Wyclif and the Lollards. J. C. Carrick, B.D.
The Two Bacons and Experimental Science. By Rev. W. J. Couper, M.A.
Calvin and the Reformed Theology. By Principal SaLmonp, D.D., U.F.C. College, Aberdeen.
Pascal and the Port Royalists. By Professor W. Ciark, LL.D., D.C.L., Trinity College, Toronto.
By Rev.
By Professor B. B. WARFIELD,

Descartes, Spinoza, and the New Philosophy. By ProfessorJ. lvrracuH, D.D., U.F.C. College, Aberdeen.
Lessing and the New Humanism. By Rev. A. P. Davipson, M.A.
Hume and his Influence on Philo- sophy and Theology. By Professor J. Orr, D.D., Glasgow.
Rousseau and Naturalism in Life and Thought. By Professor W. H. Hupson, M.A., Leland Stanford Junior University, California.
Kant and his Philosophical Revolu- tion. By Professor R. M. WENLEy, D.Se., Ph.D., University of Michigan.
Schleiermacher and the Rejuven- escence of Theology. By Professor A. Martin, D.D., New College, Edinburgh.
Hegel and Hegelianism. By Pro-
. fessor R. Mackrntosu, D.D., Lanca-
shire Independent College, Man- chester. Newman and his Influence. By
Cie SAROrnA, PhD University of Edinburgh.
Litt. Doc.,
Published Price, THREE SHILLINGS per Volume.

-) UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO ἢ] LIBRARY
---- --
Do. not. | “4
Α A.Grieve. ae
Adol fF
‘yemove
tr. Ὅν
= a
the card’
sman, Gust
Deis
ot
v2
q@ «1 τοῦ
- ἀοῦ 8 ih wa OTL al | 2 f ‘ ay | if
» Acme Library Card Pocket Under Pat. “εξ. Index-File.”’
Made by LIBRARY BUREAU: “he
wy". Ne 3 Pi

ΡΣ ΨΩ o Crh Α

1 ag sian hi

Os MANAG oun POSS = ph Pe a “Ὁ ν᾿ SLL RPP AE OD menare 2 Ὁ οι ο κέρκοι = ναῷ ἐν
SO αι gana a agen πο τι τν
Oe att το τα Fe a
Nien ea ie een nae
ane εν πε τ ὍΣ.
A αν ἋΣ κα τ ΣΟ ρα τας ES ea








": . 0 Sa Cacao acta et ag atl cod we ee aN ace με αεϑς ORR NE - al aaa ee IE π|..5. EE ea ae “e ee FI ie et I Sa en - SE ee ee - ᾿ς τ an oe πο ποτ α΄ οἰ ὙΣτα ne ne -- A ἈΚ. bee, - te ee ee es “oes ὩΣ ἀμ ee τ πα Χο ΝΣ ον ae > Sista


ee
sz 2 παρ En ag aan te
εἴα π΄’. Se ae μα σαν κ. 2 Fan EB κνσον

ἌΧ a Seo Siena

og eo
ee HP ES
Pe ΕΑΝ, EPO Χ αὶ "κα τ 5.5... “5. «.5.Ξ..... ee Ne




































































f ee IT oF 2 τσὶ Ν Seer λέ μος rere 7 re τ τσ “7.777. rao a rete terete er Sere Meco ere ere See κ᾽ IM οι -.- ΡΣ εν ΠΣ eet - ere ewer ee a a Ea eee ag Soe ὡς τ τ τς are, an! cs oe χὰ — “. = - -—- .- - μ᾿ We eee aaron Seer, re = LED Na LE, ere eer, ἐν ο “ - SO ΣΟ ΣΙ Te χὰ ~ S ~ 7 ae We ee ew, aes Ee 7 om δα, eer — πε - _ πᾳ Ν ἘΣΣΙ es ΕΣΤΣΣΕΣ “ΧΩ ΄ ~~, ~ Sen ON Soe alee oe xa ° i Oe cag Saree α ρα ας ὃ a - LEE LAE LS a! 2 eto eS . ae ᾿ aren Me ree anne . Oe ae ee eo Sern me, ὡς να era ee 2, 5 eee ᾿ EE oe Σ on were ~ ene LEE ΣΣΙΩΣ ww, Ἂἢ δ ane aa ee Sree > . ores aia 58, ae ms aw Meera er ee ee xo ἧς oe, a! See were, εἶ ot ἊΝ oe, aga ΩΣ 4 es ~ Se. Nero ee αὶ eee o ener, Nera — aoe ἐς παι ας Meee ΤΩΣ Ceara ας, ane! " πο ΟΣ — oem = Sears Ne eg eee rere = Seo SC laa ΝΣ “ ὡς eee, LEE Se “: are Se ες age ~ ee ν᾽ ere we ἀν See ἀρ ας οτος - OA Paced — cee, > eee ee = « re μι ον ee eae Speen aes oe a ae iC EE tt ac ac 5 τοσοῦτο" σ Merete ae Sata ec π᾿ δ᾽ Sere SK Se gaa ee Sa re το. ΤΣ Oe wey Se eee, re" Pe te Be Re aa eee, CG nae Seow Re elena Senet Man eee Mee ere ack “ See Rg ge Meee ed en Soteeee Eine alien “ ba Steere, ag te lage Cee Sree, a anh ἢ arene ERE EE Se ooo μὰ ere Meee eR Nee easton oe ais oe aD Sweet ee a, See Sere Ig ag a ea meee, Me eta ee eee ἣν eee Ng ae een sake ate See, Se a OE eee, “ δι Ἐν rete act EE cette Se τα ate - Eg ae Ree, Se = era ene engin Pe a ery COs ET RRS Eee eae Sere ὅν ΕΣ eS στ τος ττρτα See οἷ Se rare ree ΤΩΝ Se τ τ ττο τστς es bac a ΩΣ ΤΣ are μὴ ἘΣΣΙ ΣΣΣΣΣΣΣΣΣΣΣΣΣΣΣΣΣΣ ee ~~ SS re oer Seat : Sie ae μὰ ee ore ‘4 ἘΣΣΙ ae ΣΙ τσ τ τ τ τας were x BR eee 2 Scena ΚΣ Στ τς οτος πο νυν 7 REE ON IR Sere ὙΣ eee ee Re ogee Sane μὴ SET Og eee, were = POET: cg eee ence * Bie ee aa 29 ἘΣ ΣΕ ΣΙ Στ το στ τσ τς ἀρ νοι tng age ere μι ἘΣΣΙ ΑΙ ΣΕ ΣΕ ΟΣ ΟΣ ΟΣ ag Re am a aE Scan se nee Ἂς ἘΣΣΞΞΣΣ ΣΟ Oa eee ccc og cea ᾿ ia cena eee aea ee x Seema on ee ποτ ταν σα ας entrees δ Ree Seana x ES, SSE Te RS ἐς Ee Eee Ee Oe OE ᾿ : RTO ee i Nagi Rie, — : ata? Re Raat ae be ἢ Ra ene OLE τ τοῖς = RSI LEE ἃ ; Rg EE EON πὰ Ree εν κατο τσ κε τ οσοας ᾿ ‘ EL ROO ENCE EOC ὃ παρε μα OEE x ; ENO Sen EEE μὴ Senne τα σοσ τ α τ σσοσ ες fa RE le OEE Ἂ ne τ οτος στο τες a Pe OE μὰ A asta eet eR PCE ᾿ Pe be Seana eat OO μὰ Sette ee δ Mie Re = se EE CRE gO ms Soe στο τας : Meee TT . aie tea ce



dl
“424

ane CO Roa a ee ee
Kyaw om
ri MMs fae Mars ee


Y

AR one
a
ς ee om etre tatetstseee




Sees
yeaa Pe


re Ἢ "ἢ aE]




ys Sat He

Ὡς δρδί νοι ens 2 Deda diatn ciel ne i ts --


ee ae we ἃ
