ANDOVER-HARVARD THEOLOGICAL LIBRARY
MDCCCX
CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS
BOUGHT FROM THE FUND GIVEN IN MEMORY OF
RUSHTON DASHWOOD BURR Divinity School, Class of 1852
The gift of Mrs. Burr

A\GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK
BY
JAMES HOPE MOULTON M.A. (CANTAB.), D.Lir. (LOND.)
LATE FELLOW OF KING'S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE GREENWOOD LECTURER IN GREEK TESTAMENT IN THE VICTORIA UNIVERSITY OF MANCHESTER TUTOR IN NEW TESTAMENT I.ANGUAGE AND LITERATURE WESLEYAN COLLEGE, DIDSBURY
VOL. I
PROLEGOMENA
x
SECOND EDITION WITH CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS
a
Epinspurcu: T. ἃ T. CLARK, 38 Georce Street 1906
MAY 11 1007 λιν ον Ὁ αϑελυοοὺ Bar pen
PA 813 (M7 IF06b Vv. /
PRINTED BY MORRISON AND GIBB LIMITED,
FOR τ ἃ T. CLARK, EDINBURGH.
LONDON ἐς SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, HAMILTON, KENT, AND CO, LIMITED NEW YORK: CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS,
IN PIAM MEMORIAM PATRIS
LABORVM HERES DEDICO
PREFACE,
——
THE call for a second edition of this work within six or seven months of its first appearance gives me a welcome opportunity of making a good many corrections and additions, without altering in any way its general plan. Of the scope of these new features I shall have something to say later; at this point I have to explain the title-page, from which certain words have disappeared, not without great reluctance on my part. The statement in the first edition that the book was “based on W. F. Moulton’s edition of G. B. Winer’s Grammar,” claimed for it connexion with a work which for thirty-five years had been in constant use among New Testament students in this country and elsewhere. I should hardly have yielded this statement for excision, had not the suggestion come from one whose motives for retaining it are only less strong than my own. Sir John Clark, whose kindness throughout the progress of this work it is a special pleasure to acknowledge on such an opportunity, advised me that misapprehension was fre- quently occurring with those whose knowledge of this book was limited to the title. Since the present volume is entirely new, and does not in any way follow the lines of its great predecessor, if seems better to confine the history of the undertaking to the Preface, and take sole responsibility. I have unhappily no means of divining what judgement either Winer or his editor would have passed on my doctrines; and it is therefore, perhaps, due to Pietdt that I should drop what Pietdt mainly prompted.
It is now forty years since my father, to whose memory this book is dedicated, was invited by Messrs T. & T. Clark to translate and edit G. B. Winer’s epoch-making Grammatik des neutestamentlichen Sprachidioms. The proposal originated
with Bishop Ellicott, afterwards Chairman of the New Testa- vii
vill PREFACE.
ment Revision Company, and the last survivor of a band of workers who, while the following pages were in the press, became united once more. Dr Ellicott had been in corre- spondence on biblical matters with the young Assistant Tutor at the Wesleyan Theological College, Richmond; and _ his estimate of his powers was shown first by the proposal as to Winer, and not long after by the Bishop’s large use of my father’s advice in selecting new members of the Revision Company. Mr Moulton took his place in the Jerusalem Chamber in 1870, the youngest member of the Company ; and in the same year his edition of Winer appeared. My brother’s Life of our father (Isbister, 1899) gives an account of its reception. It would not be seemly for me to enlarge on its merits, and it would be as superfluous as unbecoming. I will only allow myself the satisfaction of quoting a few words from one who may well be called the greatest New Testament scholar this country has seen for generations. In giving his Cambridge students a short list of reference books, Dr Hort said (Romans and Ephesians, p. 71) :—
Winer’s Grammar of the New Testament, as translated and enlarged by Dr Moulton, stands far above every other for this purpose. It does not need many minutes to learn the ready use of the admirable indices, of passages and of subjects: and when the book is con- sulted in this manner, its extremely useful contents become in most cases readily accessible. Dr Moulton’s references to the notes of the best recent English com- mentaries are a helpful addition.
In 1875 Dr Moulton was transferred to Cambridge, charged by his Church with the heavy task of building up from the foundation a great Public School. What time a Head Master could spare to scholarship was for many years almost entirely pledged to the New Testament and Apocrypha Revision. Naturally it was not possible to do much to his Grammar when the second edition was called for in 1877. The third edition, five years later, was even less delayed for the incorporation of new matter; and the book stands now, in all essential points, just as it first came from its author's pen. Meanwhile the conviction was growing that the next
PREFACE. ix
edition must be a new book. Winer’s own last edition, though far from antiquated, was growing decidedly old; its jubilee is in fact celebrated by its English descendant of to-day. The very thoroughness of Winer’s work had made useless for the modern student many a disquisition against grammatical heresies which no one would now wish to drag from the lumber-room. The literature to which Winer appealed was largely buried in inaccessible foreign periodicals. And as the reputation of his editor grew, men asked for a more compact, better arranged, more up-to-date volume, in which the ripest and most modern work should no longer be stowed away in compressed notes at the foot of the page. Had time and strength permitted, Dr Moulton would have consulted his most cherished wish by returning to the work of his youth and rewriting his Grammar as an independent book. But “ wisest Fate said No.” He chose his junior col- league, to whom he had given, at first as his pupil, and afterwards during years of University training and colleague- ship in teaching, an insight into his methods and principles, and at least an eager enthusiasm for the subject to which he had devoted his own life. But not a page of the new book was written when, in February 1898, “ God’s finger touched him, and he slept.”
Since heredity does not suffice to make a grammarian, and there are many roads by which a student of New Testa- ment language may come to his task, I must add a word to explain in what special directions this book may perhaps contribute to the understanding of the inexhaustible subject with which it deals. Till four years ago, my own teaching work scarcely touched the Greek Testament, classics and com- parative philology claiming the major part of my time. But I have not felt that this time was ill spent as a prepara- tion for the teaching of the New Testament. The study of the Science of Language in general, and especially in the field of the languages which are nearest of kin to Greek, is well adapted to provide points of view from which new light may be shed on the words of Scripture. Theologians, adepts in criticism, experts in early Christian literature, bring to a task like this an equipment to which I can make no pretence. But there are other studies, never more active than now,
x PREFACE.
which may help the biblical student in unexpected ways. The life-history of the Greek language has been investi- gated with minutest care, not only in the age of its glory, but also throughout the centuries of its supposed senility and decay. Its syntax has been illuminated by the com- parative method; and scholars have arisen who have been willing to desert the masterpieces of literature and trace the humble development of the Hellenistic vernacular down to its lineal descendant in the vulgar tongue of the present day. Biblical scholars cannot study everything, and there are some of them who have never heard of Brugmann and Thumb. It may be some service to introduce them to the side-lights which comparative philology can provide.
But I hope this book may bring to the exegete material yet more important for his purpose, which might not otherwise come his way. The immense stores of illustration which have been opened to us by the discoveries of Egyptian papyri, ac- cessible to all on their lexical side in the brilliant Bable Studies of Deissmann, have not hitherto been systematically treated in their bearing on the grammar of New Testament Greek. The main purpose of these Prolegomena has accordingly been to provide a sketch of the language of the New Testament as it appears to those who have followed Deissmann into a new field of research. There are many matters of principle need- ing detailed discussion, and much new illustrative material from papyri aud inscriptions, the presentation of which will, I hope, be found helpful and suggestive. In the present volume, therefore, I make no attempt at exhaustiveness, and often omit important subjects on which I have nothing new to say. By dint of much labour on the indices, I have tried to provide a partial remedy for the manifold inconveniences of form which the plan of these pages entails. My reviewers en- courage me to hope that I have succeeded in one cherished ambition, that of writing a Grammar which can be read. The fascination of the Science of Language has possessed me ever since in boyhood I read Max Miiller’s incomparable Lectures; and I have made it my aim to communicate what I could of this fascination before going on to dry statistics and formulae. In the second volume I shall try to present 88 concisely as I can the systematic facts of Hellenistic acci-
PREFACE. xi
dence and syntax, not in the form of an appendix to a grammar of classical Greek, but giving the later language the inde- pendent dignity which it deserves. Both Winer himself and the other older scholars, whom a reviewer thinks I have unduly neglected, will naturally bulk more largely than they can do in chapters mainly intended to describe the most modern work. But the mere citation of authorities, in a handbook designed for practical utility, must naturally be subordinated to the succinct presentation of results. There will, I hope, be small danger of my readers’ overlooking my indebtedness to earlier workers, and least of all that to my primary teacher, whose labours it is my supreme object to preserve for the benefit of a new generation.
It remains to perform the pleasant duty of acknowledging varied help which has contributed a large proportion of any- thing that may be true or useful in this book. It would be endless were I to name teachers, colleagues, and friends in Cambridge, to whom through twenty years’ residence I con- tracted debts of those manifold and intangible kinds which can only be summarised in the most inadequate way: no Cantab who has lived as long within that home of exact science and sincere research, will fail to understand what I fail to express. Next to the Cambridge influences are those which come from teachers and friends whom I have never seen, and especially those great German scholars whose labours, too little assisted by those of other countries, have established the Science of Language on the firm basis it occupies to-day. In fields where British scholarship is more on a level with that of Germany, especially those of biblical exegesis and of Greek classical lore, I have also done my best to learn what fellow-workers east of the Rhine contribute to the common stock. It is to a German professor, working upon the material of which our own Drs Grenfell and Hunt have provided so large a proportion, that I owe the impulse which has produced the chief novelty of my work. My appreciation of the memorable achievement of Dr Deissmann is expressed in the body of the book; and I must only add here my grateful acknowledgement of the many encouragements he has given me in my efforts to glean after him in the field he has made his own. He has now crowned them with the
xil PREFACE.
all too generous appreciations of my work which he has con- tributed to the Theologische Literaturzeitung and the Theo- logische Rundschau. Another great name figures on most of the pages of this book. The services that Professor Blass has rendered to New Testament study are already almost equal to those he has rendered to classical scholarship. I have been frequently obliged to record a difference of opinion, though never without the inward voice whispering “ impar congressus Achilli.” But the freshness of view which this great Hellenist brings to the subject makes him almost as helpful when he fails to convince as when he succeeds ; and I have learned more and more from him, the more earnestly I have studied for myself. The name of another brilliant writer on New Testament grammar will figure more con- stantly in my second volume than my plan allows it to do in this. Professor Schmiedel has unfortunately been called away from grammar by the δ᾽ πᾶ Jerahmeel, to perform a post- mortem examination upon the Gospel history. The un- rivalled ability of his dissection is beyond question. But as there is reason to believe that the Gospels may still be studied for some time to come, we will venture to express an earnest hope that the learned and painstaking grammarian may soon resume his place among the interpreters, and con- clude the monumental work which keeps Winer’s memory green in the country of his birth.
The mention of the books which have been most fre- quently used, recalls the need of one or two explanations before closing this Preface. The text which is assumed throughout is naturally that of Westcott and Hort. The principles on which it is based, and the minute accuracy with which they are followed out, seem to allow no alternative to a grammatical worker, even if the B type of text were held to be only the result of second century revision. But in frequently quoting other readings, and especially those which belong to what Dr Kenyon conveniently calls the 6-text, I follow very readily the precedent of Blass. I need not say that Mr Geden’s Concordance has been in continual use. I have not felt bound to enter much into questions of “ higher criticism.” In the case of the Synoptic Gospels, the assumption of the “ two-source hypothesis ” has suggested
PREFACE. ΧΗΣ
a number of grammatical points of interest. Grammar helps to rivet closer the links which bind together the writings of Luke, and those of Paul (though the Pastorals often need separate treatment); while the Johannine Gospel and Epistles similarly form a single grammatical entity. Whether the remaining Books add seven or nine to the tale of separate authors, does not concern us here; for the Apocalypse, 1 Peter and 2 Peter must be treated individually as much as Hebrews, whether the traditional authorship be accepted or rejected. Last come the specific acknowledgements of most generous and welcome help received directly in the preparation of this volume. I count myself fortunate indeed in that three scholars of the first rank in different lines of study have read my proofs through, and helped me with invaluable encouragement and advice. It is only due to them that I should claim the sole responsibility for errors which I may have failed to escape, in spite of their watchfulness on my behalf. Two of them are old friends with whom I have taken counsel for many years. Dr G.G. Findlay has gone over my work with minute care, and has saved me from many a loose and ambiguous statement, besides giving me the fruit of his profound and accurate exegesis, which students of his works on St Paul’s Epistles know well. Dr Rendel Harris has brought me fresh lights from other points of view ; and I have been particularly glad of criticism from a specialist in Syriac, who speaks with authority on matters which take a prominent place in my argument. The third name is that of Professor Albert Thumb, of Marburg. The kindness of this great scholar, in examining so carefully the work of one who is still ἀγνοούμενος τῷ προσώπῳ, cannot be adequately acknowledged here. Nearly every page of my book owes its debt either to bis writings or to the criticisms and suggestions with which he has favoured me. At least twice he has called my attention to important articles in English which I had overlooked; and in my illustrations from Modern Greek I have felt myself able to venture often into fields which might have been full of pitfalls, had I not been secure in his expert guidance. Finally, in the necessary drudgery of index-making I have had welcome aid at home. By drawing up the index of Scripture quotations, my mother

χὶν PREFACE.
has done for me what she did for my father nearly forty years ago. My brother, the Rev. W. Fiddian Moulton, M.A., has spared fime from a busy pastor’s life to make me the Greek index. To all these who have helped me so freely, and to many others whose encouragement and counsel has been a constant stimulus—I would mention especially my Man- chester colleagues, Dr R. W. Moss and Professor A. S. Peake— I tender my heartfelt thanks.
The new features of this edition are necessarily confined within narrow range. The Additional Notes are suggested by my own reading or by suggestions from various reviewers and correspondents, whose kindness I gratefully acknowledge. A new lecture by Professor Thumb, and reviews by such scholars as Dr Marcus Dods, Dr H. A. A. Kennedy, and Dr Souter, have naturally provided more material than I can at present use. My special thanks are due to Mr H. Scott, of Oxton, Birkenhead, who went over the index of texts and two or three complicated numerical computations in the body of the book, and sent me unsolicited some corrections and additions, for which the reader will add his gratitude to mine. As far as was possible, the numerous additions to the Indices have been worked in at their place; but some pages of Addenda have been necessary, which will not, I hope, seriously inconvenience the reader. The unbroken kindness of my reviewers makes it needless for me to reply to criticisms here. Iam tempted to enlarge upon one or two remarks in the learned and helpful Athenaewm review, but will confine myself to a comment on the “awkward results” which the writer anticipates from the evidence of the papyri as set forth in my work. My Prolegomena, he says, “really prove that there can be no grammar of New Testament Greek, and that the grammar of the Greek in the New Testament is one and the same with the grammar of the ‘ common Greek ’ of the papyri.” I agree with everything except the “awkwardness” of this result for me. To call this book a Grammar of the ‘Common’ Greek, and enlarge it by including phenomena which do not happen to be represented in the New Testament, would certainly be more scientific. But the practical advantages of confining attention to what concerns the grammatical inter- pretation of a Book of unique importance, written in a language
PREFACE. XV
which has absolutely no other literature worthy of the name, need hardly be laboured here, and this foreword is already long enough. I am as conscious as ever of the shortcomings of this book when placed in the succession of one which has so many associations of learning and industry, of caution and flawless accuracy. But 1 hope that its many deficiencies may not prevent it from leading its readers nearer to the meaning of the great literature which it strives to interpret. The new tool is certain not to be all its maker fondly wished it to be; but from a vein so rich in treasure even the poorest instrument can hardly fail to bring out nuggets of pure gold.
J. H. M.
DipsBurRY CoLuEGE, Aug. 13, 1906.
CONTENTS.
--..-- CHAP, PAGE I. GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS . © . 1 II. History or tHE “Common” GREEK . . ° 22 III. Norges on THE ACCIDENCE . . ° . . 42 IV. Syntax: Tor Noun. . . , . . 57 V. ADJECTIVES, PRONOUNS, PREPOSITIONS . : 77 VI. THE VERB: TENSES AND ΜΟΡῈΒ or ACTION ° . 108 VII. ΤῊΝ VERB: VoIcE . . . . . . 152 VIII. Taz Vers: THE Moops . . . . . 164 ΙΧ. THe INFINITIVE AND PARTICIPLE . . . . 202 ADDITIONAL NoTEs . . . ‘ . . 233 ADDITIONAL ΝΟΤῈΒ ΤῸ THE ΒΕΟΟΝῺ EDITION . . 242 I. INDEX TO QUOTATIONS . . . . . 250 II. InpEx oF GREEK WoRDS AND Forms . . 266 Ill. InpEx oF SUBJECTS. . ., . . 270 ADDENDA TO INDICES . . . ᾿ . 282
ABBREVIATIONS.
—¢—
ABBREVIATIONS for the names of Books of Scripture will explain them- selves. In the OT and Apocrypha the names of the Books follow the English RV (except Ca for Song of Songs), as also do the numbers for chapter and verse: the LXX numbering, where it differs, is added within brackets.
Centuries are denoted iii/B.c., ii/a.D., etc., except when an exact date is given. Where the date may fall within wider limits, the notation is ii/i B.C., iv/v A.D., etc. Where papyri or inscriptions are not dated, it may generally be taken that no date is given by the editor.
The abbreviations for papyri and inscriptions are given in Index I (c) and (d), pp. 251 ff. below, with the full titles of the collections quoted.
The ordinary abbreviations for MSS, Versions, and patristic writers are used in textual notes.
Other abbreviations will, it is hoped, need no explanation : perhaps MGQGr for Modern Greek should be mentioned. It should be observed that references are to pages, unless otherwise stated: papyri and inscrip- tions are generally cited by number. In all these documents the usual notation is followed, and the original spelling preserved.
Abbott—see Index I (e) iii.
AJP=American Journal of Philology, ed. B. L. Gildersleeve, Baltimore 1880 ff.
Archw—see Index I (ὁ).
Audollent—see Index I (c).
BCH—see Index I (c).
Blass=Grammar of NT Greek, by F. Blass. Second English edition, tr. H. St J. Thackeray, London 1905. (This differs from ed.! only by the addition of pp. 306-333. Occasional reference is made to the second German edition, Gittingen 1902.) Sometimes the reference is to notes in Blass’s Acta Apostolorum (Géttingen 1895): the context will make it clear.
Burton M7T=New Testament Moods and Tenses, by E. Ὁ. Barton. Second edition, Edinburgh 1894.
Buttmann=Grammar of New Testament Greek, by A. Buttmann. English edition by J. H. Thayer, Andover 1876.
BZ=Byzantinische Zeitschrift, ed. K. Krumbacher, Leipzig 1892 ff.
Cauer—see Index I (c).
CGT=Cambridge Greek Testament for Schools and Colleges.
b
xvii
XVill ABBREVIATIONS.
CR=Classical Review (London 1887 ff.). Especially reference is made to the writer’s collection of forms and syntactical examples from the papyri, in CR xv. 31-38 and 434-442 (Feb. and Dec. 1901), and xviii, 106-112 and 151-155 (March and April 1904—to be continued).
Dalman Words=The Words of Jesus, by G. Dalman. English edition, tr. D. M. Kay, Edinburgh 1902.
Dalman Gramm.=Grammatik des jtidisch-palistinischen Aramiisch, by G. Dalman, Leipzig 1894.
DB= Dictionary of the Bible, edited by J. Hastings. 5 vols., Edinburgh 1898-1904,
Deissmann BS=Bible Studies, by G. A. Deissmann. English edition, including Bobelstudien and Neue Brbelstudien, tr. A. Grieve, Edinburgh 1901.
Deissmann In Christo= Die neutestamentliche Formel “in Christo Jesu,” by G. A. Deissmann, Marburg 1892.
Delbriick Grundr.=Grundriss der vergleichenden Grammatik der indogermanischen Sprachen, by K. Brugmann and B. Delbriick : Dritter Band, Vergleichende Syntax, by Delbriick, Strassburg 1893- 1900. (References to Brugmann’s part, on phonology and morphology, are given to his own abridgement, Kurze vergleichende Grammatik, 1904, which has also an abridged Comparative Syntax.)
Dieterich Unters.=Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der griechischen Sprache, von der hellenistischen Zeit bis zum 10. Jahrh. n. Chr., by K. Dieterich, Leipzig 1898.
DLZ= Deutsche Literaturzeitung, Leipzig.
EB=Encyclopedia Biblica, edited by T. K. Cheyne and J. S. Black. 4 vols., London 1899-1903.
EGT=Expositor’s Greek Testament, edited by W. Robertson Nicoll. 4 vols, (vol. iv. not yet published), London 1897-1903.
Exp B=Expositor’s Bible, edited by W. R. Nicoll. 49 vols., London 1887-1898.
Expos=The Expositor, edited by W. R. Nicoll. Cited by series, volume, and page. London 1875 ff.
Exp T=The Expository Times, edited by J. Hastings. Edinburgh 1889 ff.
Gildersleeve Studies = Studies in Honor of Professor Gildersleeve, Baltimore.
Gildersleeve Synt.=Syntax of Classical Greek, by B. L. Gildersleeve and C. W. E. Miller. Part i, New York 1900.
Giles Manual? =A Short Manual of Comparative Philology for classical students, by P. Giles). Second edition, London 1901.
Goodwin MT=Syntax of the Moods and Tenses of the Greek Verb, by W. W. Goodwin. Third edition, London 1889.
Goodwin Greek Gram.=A Greek Grammar, by W. W. Goodwin. London 1894.
Grimm-Thayer=Grimm’s Wilke’s Clavis Novi Testamentt, translated and enlarged by J. H. Thayer, as “ A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament.” Edinburgh 1886.
Hatzidakis=Einleitung in die neugriechische Grammatik, by G. N. Hatzidakis. Leipzig 1892.

ABBREVIATIONS. xix
Hawkins HS= Hore Synoptice, by J. C. Hawkins. Oxford 1899.
HR=A Concordance to the Septuagint, by E. Hatch and H. A. Redpath. Oxford 1897.
IMA—see Index I (c).
Indog. Forsch.=Indogermanische Forschungen, edited by K. Brugmann and W. Streitberg. Strassburg 1892 ff.
Jannaris HG=A Historical Greek Grammar, by A. N. Jannaris. London 1897.
JBL=Journal of Biblical Literature. Boston 1881 ff.
J HS—see Index I (c).
JTS=Journal of Theological Studies. London 1900 ff.
Jiilicher Introd.=Introduction to the New Testament, by A. Jiilicher. English edition, tr. by J. P. Ward, London 1904,
Kalker = Questiones de elocutione Polybiana, by F. Kaelker. In Leipziger Studien 111. ii., 1880.
Kiihner 3, or Kiihner-Blass, Kiihner-Gerth =.Ausfiihrliche Grammatik der griechischen Sprache, by R. Kiihner. Third edition, Hlementar- und Formenlehre, by F. Blass. 2 vols., Hannover 1890-2. Satzlehre, by B. Gerth. 2 vols., 1898, 1904.
KZ=Kuhn’s Zeitschrift fiir vergleichende Sprachforschung. Berlin and Giitersloh 1852 ff.
LS=A Greek-English Lexicon, by H. G. Liddell and R. Scott. Eighth edition, Oxford 1901.
Meisterhans §=Grammatik der attischen Inschriften, by K. Meisterhans. Third edition by Εἰ. Schwyzer (see p. 29n.), Berlin 1900.
MG=Concordance to the Greek Testament, by W. F. Moulton and A. S. Geden. Edinburgh 1897.
Milligan-Moulton =Commentary on the Gospel of St John, by W. Milligan and W. F. Moulton. Edinburgh 1898.
Mithraslit.—see Index I (d).
Monro HG=Homeric Grammar, by D. B. Monro. Second edition, Oxford 1891.
Nachmanson=Laute und Formen der Magnetischen Inschriften, by E. Nachmanson, Uppsala 1903.
Ramsay Paul= Paul the Traveller and Roman Citizen, by W. M. Ramsay. Third edition, London 1897.
RE*%=Herzog-Hauck Realencyclopddre. (In progress.) Leipzig.
REGr=Revue des Etudes grecques. Paris 1888 ff.
Reinhold = De Grecitate Patrum, by H. Reinhold. Halle 1898.
RhM= Rheinisches Museum. Bonn 1827 ff.
Riddell=A Digest of Platonic Idioms, by J. Riddell (in his edition of
‘the Apology, Oxford 1867).
Rutherford NP =The New Phrynichus, by W.G. Ruthertord, London 1881.
Schanz Beitr. = Beitrige zur historischen Syntax der griechischen Sprache, edited by M. Schanz. Wiirtzburg 1882 ff.
Schmid Aitic.= Der Atticismus in seinen Hauptvertretern von Dionysius von Halikarnass bis auf den zweiten Philostratus, by W. Schmid. 4 vols. and Register, Stuttgart 1887-1897.
xx ABBREVIATIONS.
Schmidt Jos.=De Flavii Josephi elocutione, by W. Schmidt, Leipzig 1893.
Schulze Gr. Lat.=Greeca Latina, by W. Schulze, Gottingen 1901.
Schwyzer Perg.=Grammatik der pergamenischen Inschriften, by E. Schweizer (see p. 29n.), Berlin 1898.
SH=The Epistle to the Romans, by W. Sanday and A. C. Headlam. Fifth edition, Edinburgh 1902.
ThLZ=Theologische Literaturzeitung, edited by A. Harnack and E. Schiirer, Leipzig 1876 ff.
Thumb Hellen.=Die griechische Sprache im Zeitalter des Hellenismus, by A. Thumb, Strassburg 1901.
Thumb Handb.=Handbuch der neugriechischen Volkssprache, by A. Thumb, Strassburg 1895.
Ti=Novum Testamentum Greece, by C. Tischendorf. Editio octava critica maior. 2 vols., Leipzig 1869-72. Also vol. iii, by C. R. Gregory, containing Prolegomena, 1894.
Viereck SG—see Index I (c).
Viteau= Etude sur le grec du Nouveau Testament, by J. Viteau. Vol. i, Le Verbe: Syntaxe des Propositions, Paris 1893; vol. ii, Sujet, Complément et Attribut, 1896.
Volker=Syntax der griechischen Papyri. I. Der Artikel, by F. Volker, Miinster i. W. 1903.
Votaw=The Use of the Infinitive in Biblical Greek, by C. W. Votaw. Chicago 1896.
Wellh.=Einleitung in die drei ersten Evangelien, by J. Wellhausen. Berlin 1905.
WH=The New Testament in the Original Greek, by B. F. Westcott and F. J. A. Hort. Vol. i, Text (also ed. minor); vol. ii, Introduction. Cambridge and London 1881.
WH App.=Appendix to WH, in vol. ii, containing Notes on Select Readings and on Orthography, etc.
WM=<A Treatise on the Grammar of New Testament Greek, regarded as a sure basis for New Testament Exegesis, by G. B. Winer. Trans lated from the German, with large additions and full indices, by W. F. Moulton. Third edition, Edinburgh 1882.
WS=G. B. Winer’s Grammatik des neutestamentlichen Sprachidioms. Eighth edition, newly edited by P. W. Schmiedel, Gottingen 1894 ff. (In progress.)
ZNTW =Zeitschrift fiir die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft, edited by E. Preuschen. Giessen 1900 ff.
A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK. PROLEGOMENA.
----..------ CHAPTER I. GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS,
As recently as 1895, in the opening chapter of a beginner’s manual of New Testament Greek, the present writer defined the language as “Hebraic Greek, colloguial Greek, and late Greek.” In this definition the characteristic features of the dialect were expressed according to a formula which was not questioned then by any of the leading writers on the subject. It was entirely approved by Dr W. F. Moulton, who would. undoubtedly at that time have followed these familiar lines, had he been able to achieve his long cherished purpose of rewriting his English Winer as an independent work. It is not without impera- tive reason that, in this first instalment of a work in which I hoped to be my father’s collaborator, I have been com- pelled seriously to modify the position he took, in view of fresh evidence which came too late for him to examine. In the second edition of the manual referred to, “common Greek ” is substituted for the first element in the definition. The disappearance of that word “Hebraic” from its pro- minent place in our delineation of NT language marks a change in our conceptions of the subject nothing less than re- volutionary. This is not a revolution in theory alone. It
New Lights.
1 Introduction to the Study of New Testament Greek, with a First Reader. Second Edition, 1904 (C. H. Kelly). I
=e aye τ eee ey '
2 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
touches exegesis at innumerable points. It demands large modifications in our very latest grammars, and an overhauling of our best and most trusted commentaries. To write a new Grammar, so soon after the appearance of fresh light which transforms in very important respects our whole point of view, may seem ἃ premature undertaking. But it must not be supposed that we are concerned with a revolutionary theory which needs time for readjusting our science to new conditions. The development of the Greek language, in the period which separates Plato and Demosthenes from our own days, has been patiently studied for a generation, and the main lines of a scientific history have been thoroughly estab- lished. What has happened to our own particular study is only the discovery of its unity with the larger science which has been maturing steadily all the time. “Biblical Greek” was long supposed to lie in a backwater: it has now been brought out into the full stream of progress. It follows that we have now fresh material for illustrating our subject, and a more certain methodology for the use of material which we had already at hand. : eons The isolated position of the Greek found Gun’ in the LXX and the NT has been the problem dividing grammatical students of this liter- ature for generations past. That the Greek Scriptures, and the small body of writings which in language go with them, were written in the Κοινή, the “common” or “ Hellen- istic” Greek! that superseded the dialects of the classical period, was well enough known. But it was most obviously different from the literary Kovy of the period. It could not be adequately paralleled from Plutarch or Arrian, and the Jewish writers Philo and Josephus* were no more helpful than their “profane” contemporaries. Naturally the pecu- liarities of Biblical Greek came to be explained from its own conditions. The LXX was in “ translation Greek,” its syntax determined perpetually by that of the original Hebrew. Much the same was true of large parts of the NT, where
1T shall use the terms Hellenistic, Hellenist, and Hellenism throughout for the Greek of the later period, which had become coextensive with Western civilisation.
2 See below, p. 233.
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS. 3
translation had taken place from an original Aramaic. But even where this was not the case, it was argued, the writers used Greek as foreigners, Aramaic thought underlying Greek expression. Moreover, they were so familiar with the LXX that its idiosyncrasies passed largely into their own style, which accordingly was charged with Semitisms from two dis- tinct sources. Hence this “Judaic” or “ Biblical ” Greek, this “language of the Holy Ghost,”! found in the sacred writings and never profaned by common use. It was a phenomenon against which the science of language could raise no a prior objection. The Purist, who insisted on finding parallels in classical Greek literature for everything in the Greek NT, found his task impossible without straining language to the breaking-point. His antagonist the Hebraist went absurdly far in recognising Semitic influence where none was really operative. But when a grammarian of balanced judgement like G. B. Winer came to sum up the bygone controversy, he was found admitting enough Semitisms to make the Biblical Greek essentially an isolated language still.
It is just this isolation which the new evidence comes in to destroy.” The Greek papyri of Egypt are in themselves nothing novel; but their importance for the historical study of the language did not begin to be realised until, within the last decade or so, the explorers began to enrich us with an output of treasure which has been perpetually fruitful in surprises. The attention of the classical world has been busy with the lost treatise of Aristotle and the new poets Bacchylides and Herodas, while theologians everywhere have eagerly dis- cussed new “Sayings of Jesus.” But even these last must yield in importance to the spoil which has been gathered from the wills, official reports, private letters, petitions, accounts, and other trivial survivals from the rubbish-heaps of antiquity.” They were studied by a young investigator of genius, at that time known only by one small treatise on the Pauline formula ἐν Χριστῷ, which to those who read it now shows abundantly the powers that were to achieve such
Greek Papyri: Deissmann.
1So Cremer, Biblico-Theological Lexicon of NT Greek, p- iv (E.T.), follow- ing Rothe. (Cited by Thumb, Hellienismus 181.) [2>See p. 242,

4 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
splendid pioneer work within three or four years. Deiss- mann’s Bibelstudien appeared in 1895, his Neue Bibelstudien 1 in 1897. It is needless to describe how these lexical researches in the papyri and the later inscriptions proved that hundreds of words, hitherto assumed to be “ Biblical,’—technical words, as it were, called into existence or minted afresh by the language of Jewish religion—were in reality normal first- century spoken Greek, excluded from literature by the nice canons of Atticising taste. Professor Deissmann dealt but briefly with the grammatical features of this newly-discovered Greek; but no one charged with the duty of editing a Gram- mar of NT Greek could read his work without seeing that a systematic grammatical study in this field was the indis- pensable equipment for such a task. In that conviction the present writer set himself to the study of the collections which have poured with bewildering rapidity from the busy workshops of Oxford and Berlin, and others, only less conspicuous. The lexical gleanings after Deissmann which these researches have produced, almost entirely in documents published since his books were written, have enabled me to confirm his conclusions from independent investigation.? A large part of my grammatical material is collected in a series of papers in the Classical Review (see Ὁ. xviil.), to which I shall frequently have to make reference in the ensuing pages as supplying in detail the evidence for the results here to be described. The new linguistic facts now in evidence venue show with startling clearness that we have at last before us the language in which the apostles and evangelists wrote. The papyri exhibit in their writers a variety of literary education even wider than that observable in the NT, and we can match each sacred author with documents that in respect of Greek stand on about the same plane. The conclusion is that “ Biblical” Greek, except where it is translation Greek, was simply the vernacular of daily life® Men who aspired to literary fame wrote in an
1 See p. xviii. above.
2 See Hapositor for April 1901 and February and December 1903.
8 Cf Wellhausen (Zinl. 9): ‘‘In the Gospels, spoken Greek, and indeed Greek spoken among the lower classes, makes its entrance into literature.”
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS. 4)
artificial dialect, a would-be revival of the language of Athens in her prime, much as educated Greeks of the present day profess to do. The NT writers had little idea that they were writing literature. The Holy Ghost spoke absolutely in the language of the people, as we might surely have expected He would. The writings inspired of Him were those
Which he may read that binds the sheaf, Or builds the house, or digs the grave, And those wild eyes that watch the wave In roarings round the coral reef.
The very grammar and dictionary cry out against men who would allow the Scriptures to appear in any other form than that “ understanded of the people.” Δ Universal There is one very striking fact brought out Language. by the study of papyri and inscriptions which preserve for us the Hellenistic vernacular. It was a language without serious dialectic differences, except presumably in pronunciation. The history of this lingua franca must be traced in a later chapter. Here it suffices to point out that in the first centuries of our era Greek covered a far larger proportion of the civilised world than even English does to-day.* The well-known heroics of Juvenal (iii. 60 f.)—
Non possum ferre, Quirites, Graecam Urbem—,
joined with the Greek “ Εἰς ᾿Εαυτόν " of the Roman Emperor and the Greek Epistle to the Romans, serve as obvious evidence that a man need have known little Latin to live in Rome itself. It was not Italy but Africa that first called for a Latin Bible.” That the Greek then current in almost every part of the Em- pire was virtually uniform is at first a startling fact, and to no one so startling as to a student of the science of language. Dialectic differentiation is the root principle of that science - 8

1Cf A. S. Wilkins, Roman Education 19; SH lii ff.
3.50 at least most critics believe. Dr Sanday, however, prefers Antioch, which suits our point equally well. Rome is less likely. See Dr Kennedy in Hastings’ BD iii. 54.
3 See, for instance, the writer’s Two Lectures on the Science of Language, pp. 21-28. [5 See p. 242,
θ A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
and when we know how actively it works within the narrow limits of Great Britain, it seems strange that it should ap- parently be suspended in the vast area covered by Hellenistic Greek. We shall return to this difficulty later (pp. 19-39): for the present we must be content with the fact that any dialect variation that did exist is mostly beyond the range of our present knowledge to detect. Inscriptions, distributed over the whole area, and dated with precision enough to trace the slow development of the vernacular as it ad- vanced towards Medieval and Modern Greek, present us with a grammar which only lacks homogeneity according as their authors varied in culture. As we have seen, the papyri of Upper Egypt tally in their grammar with the language seen in the NT, as well as with inscriptions like those of Pergamum and Magnesia. No one can fail to see how immeasurably important these conditions were for the growth of Christianity. The historian marks the fact that the Gospel began its career of conquest at the one period in the world’s annals when civilisation was concen- trated under a single ruler. The grammarian adds that this was the only period when a single language was under- stood throughout the countries which counted for the history of that Empire. The historian and the grammarian must of course refrain from talking about “ Providence.” They would be suspected of “an apologetic bias” or “an edifying tone,” and that is necessarily fatal to any reputation for scientific attainment. We will only remark that some old-fashioned people are disposed to see in these facts a σημεῖον. in its way 88 instructive as the Gift of Tongues. τῆς ᾿ It is needless to observe that except in Bilingualism the Greek world, properly so called, Greek did ‘not hold a monopoly. Egypt throughout the long period of the Greek papyri is very strongly bilingual, the mixture of Greek and native names in the same family, and the prevalence of double nomenclature, often making it diffi- cult to tell the race of an individual A bilingual country
11ὺ should be noted that in the papyri we have not to do only with Egyptians and Greeks. In Par P 48 (1538 B.c.) there is a letter addressed to an Arab by two of his brothers. The editor, M. Brunet de Presle, remarks as follows on this :—‘‘ It is worth our while to notice the rapid diffusion of Greek,
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS. 7
is vividly presented to us in the narrative of Ac 14, where the apostles preach in Greek and are unable to understand the excited populace when they relapse into Lycaonian. What the local Greek was like, we may gauge from such specimens as the touching Christian epitaph published by Mr Cronin in JHS, 1902, p. 369 (see Exp 7 xiv. 430), and dated “ little if at all later than iii/a.p.” We need not develop the evidence for other countries: it is more to the point if we look at the conditions of a modern bilingual country, such as we have at home in the country of Wales. Any popular English poli- ticlan or preacher, visiting a place in the heart of the Princi- pality, could be sure of an audience, even if it were assumed that he would speak in English. If he did, they would understand him. But should he unexpectedly address them in Welsh, we may be very sure they would be “the more quiet”; and a speaker anxious to conciliate a hostile meeting would gain a great initial advantage if he could surprise them with the sound of their native tongue! Now this 18 exactly what happened when Paul addressed the Jerusalem mob from the stairs of Antonia. They took for granted he would speak in Greek, and yet they made “a great silence ” when he faced them with the gesture which indicated a wish to address them. ‘Schiirer nods, for once, when he calls in Paul’s Aramaic speech as a witness of the people’s ignorance of Greek.? It does not prove even the “inadequate ” knowledge which he gives as the alternative possibility for the lower classes, if by “inadequate know-
in Palestine.
after Alexander’s conquest, among a mass of people who in all other respects jealously preserved their national characteristics under foreign masters. The papyri show us Egyptians, Persians, Jews, and here Arabs, who do not appear to belong to the upper classes, using the Greek language. We must not be too exacting towards them in the matter of style. Nevertheless the letter which follows is almost irreproachable in syntax and orthography, which does not always happen even with men of Greek birth.” If these remarks, published in 1865, had been followed up as they deserved, Deissmann would have come too late. It is strange how little attention was aroused by the great collections of papyri at Paris and London, until the recent flood of discovery set in.
1 These words were written before I had read Dr T. K. Abbott’s able, but not always conclusive, article in his volume of Essays. On p. 164 he gives an incident from bilingual Ireland exactly parallel with that imagined above. Prof. T. H. Williams tells me he has often heard Welsh teachers illustrating the narrative of Ac 21“ 227 in the same way. (On Lystra, see p. 283.)
2 Jewish People, 11. i. 48 (=* 11. 68).
8 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
ledge” is implied that the crowd would have been unable to follow a Greek speech. They thought and spoke among themselves, like the Welsh, exclusively in their native tongue ; but we may well doubt if there were many of them who could not understand the world-language, or even speak in it when necessary.|_ We have in fact a state of things essentially the same as in Lystra. But the imperfect knowledge of Greek which may be assumed for the masses in Jerusalem and Lystra is decidedly less probable for Galilee and Perea. Hellenist Jews, ignorant of Aramaic, would be found there as in Jerusalem ; and the proportion of foreigners would be much larger. That Jesus Himself and the Apostles regularly used Aramaic is beyond question, but that Greek was also at command is almost equally certain. There is not the slightest presumption against the use of Greek in writings purporting to emanate from the circle of the first believers. They would write as men who had used the language from boyhood, not as foreigners painfully expressing themselves in an imperfectly known idiom. Their Greek would differ in quality according to their education, like that of the private letters among the Egyptian papyri. But it does not appear that any of them used Greek as we may some- times find cultured foreigners using English, obviously trans- lating out of their own language as they go along. Even the Greek of the Apocalypse itself does not seem to owe any
~

1 The evidence for the use of Greek in Palestine is very fully stated by Zahn in his Kinl. in das NT, ch. ii. Cf also Jiilicher in EB ii. 2007 ff. Iam glad to find my view corroborated by Mahaffy, in his lectures on ‘‘ Hellenism in Alexander’s Empire”: see pp. 180 f., where he says, ‘‘ Though we may believe that in Galilee and among his intimates our Lord spoke Aramaic, and though we know that some of his last words upon the cross were in that language, yet his public teaching, his discussions with the Pharisees, his talk with Pontius Pilate, were certainly carried on in Greek.” Professor Mahaffy is no specialist on Gospel criticism—any more, I might add, than on Buddhism, (p. 100),—and it would be hard to persuade modern scholars that Christ’s public teaching was mainly in Greek. But though he goes too far, he takes the direction in which every student of Hellenism is driven. I wish he had de- veloped his thesis: we could have spared for this purpose many space-filling allusions to modern politics, on which the Professor is no wiser than the rest of us.
2Dr T. K. Abbott (Hssays 170) points out that Justin Martyr, brought up near Sichem early in ii/A.p., depends entirely on the LXX—a circumstance which is ignored by Mgr Barnes in his attempt to make a different use of Justin (JTS vi. 369). (See further below, p. 233.)
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS. 9
of its blunders to “ Hebraism.” The author's uncertain use of cases is obvious to the most casual reader. In any other writer we might be tempted to spend time over τὰς λυχνίας in 1”, where τῶν λυχνιῶν is clearly needed: for him it is enough to say that the neighbouring οὕς may have produced the aberration. We find him perpetually indifferent to concord. But the less educated papyri give us plentiful parallels from a field where Semitism cannot be suspected.! After all, we do not suspect Shakspere of foreign upbringing because he says “ between you and 1. 5 Neither he nor his unconscious imitators in modern times would say “between I and you,” any more than the author of the Apocalypse would have said ἀπὸ ὁ μάρτυς ὁ πιστός (15): it is only that his grammatical sense is satisfied when the governing word has affected the case of one object.2 We shall find that other peculiarities of the writer's Greek are on the same footing. Apart from places where he may be definitely translating a Semitic document, there is no reason to believe that his grammar would have been materially different had he been a native of Oxyrhynchus, assuming the extent of Greek education the same.* Close to
Apocalypse.
1 See my exx. of nom. in apposition to noun in another case, and of gender neglected, in CR xviii. 151. Cf also below, p. 60. (Ἀπὸ ὁ ὦν, 14, is of course an intentional tour de force.) Note the same thing in the 6-text of 2 Th 15, Ἰησοῦ. . . διδούς (D* FG and some Latin authorities).
2 Merchant of Venice, 11, ii. (end—Antonio’s letter).
8 There are parallels to this in correct English. ‘‘ Drive far away the disastrous Kéres, they who destroy” (Harrison, Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion, p. 168) would not be mended by substituting them.
‘The grammatical peculiarities of the book are conveniently summarised in a few lines by Jiilicher, Introd. to NT, p. 273: fora full account see the in- troduction to Bousset’s Commentary, in the Meyer series. It may be well to observe, a propos of the curious Greek of Rev, that grammar here must play a part in literary criticism. It will not do to appeal to grammar to prove that the author is a Jew: as far as that goes, he might just as well have been a farmer of the Fayfim. Thought and material must exclusively determine that question. But as that point is hardly doubtful, we pass on to a more important inference from the imperfect Greek culture of this book. If its date was 95 ΑΙ, the author cannot have written the fourth Gospel only a short time after. Either, therefore, we must take the earlier date for Rev, which would allow the Apostle to improve his Greek by constant use in a city like Ephesus where his Aramaic would be useless; or we must suppose that someone (say, the author of Jn 21%) mended his grammar for him throughout the Gospel.
10 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
the other end of the scale comes the learned Rabbi of Tarsus Paul. Luke “ A Hebrew, the son of Hebrews,” he calls “Hebrews.” Dimself (Phil 3°), and Zahn is no doubt right | in inferring that he always claimed Aramaic as his mother tongue. But he had probably used Greek from childhood with entire freedom, and during the main part of his life may have had few opportunities of using Aramaic at all. It is highly precarious to argue with Zahn from “Abba, Father” (Rom 835, Gal 4°), that Aramaic was the language of Paul’s prayers. The peculiar sacredness of association belonging to the first word of the Lord’s Prayer in its original tongue supplies a far more probable account of its liturgi- cal use among Gentile Christians. Finally, we have the Gentile Luke? and the auctor ad Hebreeos, both of whom may well have known no Aramaic at all: to the former we must return presently. Between these extremes the NT writers lie; and of them all we may assert with some con- fidence that, where translation is not involved, we shall find hardly any Greek expression used which would sound strangely to speakers of the Κοινή in Gentile lands.
To what extent then should we expect to find the style of Jewish Greek writers coloured by the influence of Aramaic or Heb- rew? Here our Welsh analogy helps us. Captain Fluellen is marked in Shakspere not only by his Welsh pronunciation of English, but also by his fondness for the phrase “look you.” Now “look you” is English: I am told it is common in the Dales, and if we could dissociate it from Shakspere’s Welsh- man we should probably not be struck by it as a bizarre expression. But why does Fluellen use it so often? Because
Genuine Semitisms.
Otherwise, we must join the ranks of the Xwplfovres. Here we only state the contribution grammar must make to this great problem: other considerations must decide the answer. Dr Bartlet (in Hep T for Feb. 1905, p. 206) puts Rev under Vespasian and assigns it to the author of Jn: he thinks that Prof. Ramsay’s account (Seven Churches, p. 89) does not leave sufficient time for the development of Greek style.
1 Cf Bp Chase, in Texts and Studies, 1. iii. 23. This is not very different from the devout Roman Catholic’s ‘‘saying Paternoster” ; but Paul will not allow even one word of prayer in a foreign tongue without adding an instant transla- tion. Note that Pader is the Welsh name for the Lord’s Prayer. (See p. 233.)
3 Cf Dalman, Words, 40f.
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS. 11
it translates two or three Welsh phrases of nearly identical meaning, which would be very much on his tongue when talking with his own countrymen. For the same reason the modern Welshman overdoes the word “ indeed.” In exactly the same way the good Attic interjection (Sov is used by some NT writers, with a frequency quite un-Attic, simply because they were accustomed to the constant use of an equivalent inter- jection in their own tongue! Probably this is the furthest extent to which Semitisms went in the ordinary Greek speech or writing of men whose native language was Semitic. It brought into prominence locutions, correct enough as Greek, but which would have remained in comparatively rare use but for the accident of their answering to Hebrew or Aramaic phrases. Occasionally, moreover, a word with some special metaphorical meaning might be translated into the literally corresponding Greek and used with the same connotation, as when the verb on, in the ethical sense, was represented not by the exactly answering ἀναστρέφεσθαι, but by περιπατεῖν2 But these cases are very few, and may be transferred any day to the other category, illustrated above in the case of ἐδού, by the discovery of new papyrus texts. It must not be forgotten

᾿ς 1 Note that James uses ἰδού 6 times in his short Epistle, Paul only 9 times (including one quotation) in all his writings. In Ac 1-12 it appears 16 times, in 13-28 only 7 : its rarity in the Gentile atmosphere is characteristic. It is instructive to note the figures for narrative as against speeches and OT quotations, Mt has 33 in narrative, 4 in quotations, 24 in speeches ; Mk 0/1/6; Lk 16/1/40; Ac (1-12) 4/0 12, Ac(13-28) 1/0/6 ; Jn0/1/3. Add that Heb has 4 OT quotations and no other occurrence, and Rev has no less than 26 occurrences. It is obvious that it was natural to Hebrews in speech, and to some of them (not Mk or Jn) in narrative. Luke in the Palestinian atmosphere (Lk, Ac 1-12) employs it freely, whether reproducing his sources or bringing in a trait of local character like Shakspere with Fluellen. Hort (Z£cclesia, p. 179) says ἰδού is ‘‘a phrase which when writing in his own person and sometimes even in speeches [Luke] reserves for sudden and as it were providential interpositions.” He does not appear to include the Gospel, to which the remark is evidently in- applicable, and this fact somewhat weakens its application to Ac 1-12. But with this reservation we may accept the independent testimony of Hort’s instinct to our conclusion that Luke when writing without external influences upon him would use ἰδού as a Greek would use it. The same is true of Paul. Let me quote in conclusion a curiously close parallel, unfortunately late (iv/v A.D.) to Lk 1816: BU 948 (a letter) γινώσκειν ἐθέλω ὅτι εἶπεν 6 πραγματευτὴς ὅτι ἡ μήτηρ σου ἀσθενῖ, εἰδοῦ, δέκα τρῖς μῆνες. (See p. 70.) It weakens the case for Aramaism (Wellh. 29). 2 Deissmann, BS 194. Πορεύομαι is thus used in 1 Pet 4° al.
12 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
that the instrumental ἐν in ἐν μαχαίρῃ (Lk 22*) and ἐν ῥάβδῳ (1 Co 4532) was only rescued from the class of “ Hebraisms ” by the publication of the TZebétunis Papyrt (1902), which presented us with half-a-dozen Ptolemaic citations for it. Grammatical .. A very important distinction . must be and Lexical, awn at this point between Semitisms con- cerning vocabulary and those which affect syntax. The former have occupied us mainly so far, and they are the principal subject of Deissmann’s work. Gram- matical Semitisms are a much more serious matter. We might indeed range under this head all sins against native Greek style and idiom, such as most NT books will show. Co-ordination of clauses with the simple «ai? instead of the use of participles or subordinate clauses, is a good example. It is quite true that a Hebrew would find this style come natural to him, and that an Egyptian might be more likely, in equal absence of Greek culture, to pile up a series of geni- tive absolutes. But in itself the phenomenon proves nothing more than would a string of “ands” in an English rustic’s story—elementary culture, and not the hampering presence of a foreign idiom that is being perpetually translated into its most literal equivalent. A Semitism which definitely contravenes Greek syntax is what we have to watch for. We have seen that ἀπὸ ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ ὁ μάρτυς ὁ πιστός does not come into this category. But Rev 2% ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις ᾿Αντίπας ὁ μάρτυς... ὃς ἀπεκτάνθη would be a glaring example, for it is impossible to conceive οὗ ᾿Αντίπας as an indeclinable. The Hebraist might be supposed to argue that the nom. is unchanged because it would be un- changed (stat. abs.) in Hebrew. But no one would seriously imagine the text sound: it matters little whether we mend it with Lachmann’s conjecture ’Avtiza or with that of the later copyists, who repeat als after ἡμέραις and drop ὅς. The typical case of ἐγένετο ἦλθε will be discussed below;
1 Bxpos. Vi. vii. 1123 οὗ CR xviii. 1538.
2 Cf Hawkins HS 120f., on the frequency of καί in Mk. Thumb observes that καί in place of hypotaxis is found in MGr—and in Aristotle (Hellenismus 129): here even Viteau gives way. So ἦρθε καιρὸς κι’ ἀρρώστησεν (Abbott 70). The simple parataxis of Mk 15", Jn 4% 11°, is illustrated by the uneducated document Par P 18, ἔτι δύο ἡμέρας ἔχομεν καὶ φθάσομεν εἰς ΠΠηλούσι.
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS. . 13
and in the course of our enquiry we shall dispose of others, like ἧς τὸ θυγάτριον αὐτῆς (Mk 7%), which we now find occur- ring in Greek that is beyond suspicion of Semitic influences. There remain Semitisms due to translation, from the Hebrew of the OT, or from Aramaic “sources” underlying parts of the Synoptists and Acts. The former case covers Translation all the usages which have been su pposed Greek. to arise from over-literal rendering in the LXX, the constant reading of which by Hel- lenist Jews has unconsciously affected their Greek. Here of course we have abnormal Greek produced by the effort of Greek-speaking men to translate the already obsolete and imperfectly understood Hebrew. When the Hebrew puzzled them, they would take refuge in a barbarous literalness, like a schoolboy translating Vergil. It was ignorance of NX, not ignorance of σύν, which was responsible for Aquila’s ἐν κεφαλαίῳ ἔκτισεν ὁ θεὸς σὺν τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ σὺν THY γῆν. It is not antecedently probable that such “translation Greek” would influence free Greek except by supplying phrases for conscious or unconscious quotation: these phrases would not become models to be followed by men who wrote the language as their own. How far such foreign idioms may get into a language, we may see by examining our own. ‘We have a few foreign phrases which have been literally translated into English, and have maintained their place without consciousness of their origin: “that goes without saying,’ or “this gives furiously to think,” will serve as ‘examples. Many more are retained as conscious quotations, with no effort to assimilate them to Englishidiom. “To return to our muttons ” illustrates one kind of these barbarisms; but there are Biblical phrases taken over in a similar way without sacrificing their unidiomatic form. We must notice, however, that such phrases are sterile: we have only to imagine another verb put for saying in our version of Cela va sans dire to see how entirely such an importation fails to influence the syntax of our language. | Hebraiam in The general discussion of this important Luke. subject may be clinched with an enquiry into the diction of Luke, whose varieties of style in the different parts of his work form a particularly interesting
14 Α GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
and important problem.' I restrict myself to grammatical Hebraisms mainly, but it will be useful to recall Dalman’s list (Words 20 ff.) to see how far Luke is concerned in it. He gives as pure Aramaisms (a) the superfluous ἀφείς or καταλιπών and ἤρξατο, as more Aramaic than Hebrew the use of εἶναι with participle as a narrative tense. Either Aramaic or Hebrew will account for (6) the superfluous ἐλθών, καθίσας, ἑστώς, and ἀναστάς or ἐγερθεί. Pure Hebraisms are (0) the periphrases with πρόσωπον, the use of ἐν τῷ with infinitive-—but this is found in classical historians, in Polybius? and in papyri, and therefore cannot fairly be reckoned,—the types ἀκοῇ ἀκούσετε and βλέποντες βλέψετε (see below, pp. 75 f.), and the formule καὶ ἐγένετο, ἐλάλησεν λαλῶν and ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν In class (a), we find
1In assuming the unity of the two books ad Theophilum, I am quite content to shield myself behind Blass. To be a great ‘‘philologist” is apparently as sure a guarantee of incompetence as to be an ‘‘apologist,” to judge from Jiilicher’s lofty scorn. But common sense suggests that on the integrity of a Greek book the somewhat narrow training of the professional NT critic cannot compare with the equipment of a master in criticism over the whole range of Greek literature.
. 3 60 Kilker 253, and below, p. 215. Add Par Ρ 68 (ii/s.c.) rls yap οὕτως ἐστὶν ἀνάλγητως ἐν τῷ λογίζεσθαι καὶ πράγματος διαφορὰν εὑρεῖν, ὃς οὐδ᾽ αὐτὸ τοῦτο δυνήσεται συννοεῖν ; It is of course the frequency of this locution that is due to Semitic thought : cf what is said of ἰδού, above, p. 11.
3See Wellh. 16. To class (6) I may append a note on els ἀπάντησιν, which in Mt 27°? (6-text) and 1 Th 4" takes a genitive. This is of course a very literal translation of πε», which is given by HR as its original in 29 places, as against 16 with dative. (Variants συναν., ὑπαντ., and others are often occurring: I count all places where one of the primary authorities has els dw. with gen. or dat. representing “>. In addition there are a few places where the phrase answers to a different original; also 1 ex. with gen. and 8 with dat. from the Apocrypha.) Luke (Ac 28") uses it with dat., and in Mt 25° it appears absolutely, as once in LXX (1 Sa 13"5). Now this last may be directly paralleled in a Ptolemaic papyrus which certainly has no Semitism —Tb P 48 (ii/B.c.) παρεγενήθημεν els ἀπάντησιν (a newly arriving magistrate). In BU 862 (215 a.v.) πρὸς [ἀ]πάντηϊσιν τοθ]ἡ γεμόνος has the very gen. we want. One of Strack’s Ptolemaic inscriptions (Archiv iii, 129) has ἵν᾽ εἰδῆι ἣν ἔσχηκεν πρὸς αὐτὸν ἡ πόλις εὐχάριστον ἀπάντησιν. It seems that the special idea of the word was the official welcome of a newly arrived dignitary—an idea singularly in place in the NT exx. The case after it is entirely consistent with Greek idiom, the gen. as in our ‘‘to Ais inauguration,” the dat. as the case governed by the verb. If in the LXX the use has been extended, it is only because it seemed so literal a translation of the Hebrew. Note that in 1 Th 2.6. the authorities of the 6-text read the dat., which is I suspect better Greek. (What has been said applies also to els ὑπάντησιν αὐτῷ, as in Mt 8%, Jn 1215: the twa words seem synonymous). See also p. 242.
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS. 15
Luke unconcerned with the first case. The third we must return to (see pp. 225 ff.): suffice to say now that it has its roots in classical Greek, and is at most only a more liberal use of what is correct enough, if less common. But ἤρξατο raises an interesting question. In Lk 38 we find καὶ μὴ ἄρξησθε λέγειν ἐν ἑαυτοῖς. Dalman (p. 27) shows that in narrative “the Palestinian-Jewish literature uses the meaningless ‘he began,” a conventional locution which was evidently parallel with our Middle-English auxiliary gan. . It is very common in the Synoptists, and occurs twice as often in Luke as in Matthew. Dalman thinks that if this Aramaic "WY with participle had become practically meaningless, we might well find the same use in direct speech, though no example happens to be known. Now in the otherwise verbally identical verse Mt 3° we find δόξητε for ἄρξησθε, “do not presume to say,” which is thoroughly idiomatic Greek, and manifestly a deliberate improvement of an original preserved more exactly by Luke.! It seems to follow that this original was a Greek translation of the Aramaic logia-document, used in common by both Evangelists, but with greater freedom by the first. If Luke was ignorant of Aramaic,» he would be led by his keen desire for accuracy to incorporate with a minimum of change translations he was able to secure, even when they were executed by men whose Greek was not very idiomatic. This conclusion, which is in harmony with our general impressions of his methods of using his sources, seems to me much more probable than to suppose that it was he who misread Aramaic words in the manner illustrated by Nestle on Lk 1141" (Hap 7 xv. 528): we may just as well accuse the (oral or written) translation he employed. Passing on to Dalman’s (6) class, in which Luke is con- cerned equally with the other Synoptists, we may observe that only a very free translation would drop these pleonasms. In a sense they.are “ meaningless,” just as the first verb is in “ He went and did it all the same,” or “He σοΐ up and went out,” or (purposely to take a parallel from the vernacular) “So he

1 But see E. Norden, Antike Kunstprosa ii. 487. *Luke ‘‘probably did not understand Aramaic,” says Jiilicher, Introd. 859. That Dalman ( Words 38-41) holds this view, is almost decisive.
16 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
ups and says.” But however little additional information they may add—and for us at least the “stand praying” is not a superfluous touch—they add a distinct nuance to the whole phrase, which Luke was not likely to sacrifice when he met it in his translation or heard it from the αὐτόπται whose story he was jotting down. The same may be said of the pleonastic phrases which begin and end Dalman’s list of “pure Hebraisms.” In this class (c) therefore there remains only the construction with καὶ ἐγένετο, answering to the narrative "ἢ, which is (strangely enough) almost peculiar to Luke in the NT. There are three constructions :—(a) ἐγένετο ἦλθε, (Ὁ) ἐγένετο καὶ ἦλθε, (c) ἐγένετο (αὐτὸν) ἐλθεῖν: The occurrences of these respectively are for Lk 22/11/5, for Ac 0/0/17. It may be added that the construction occurs almost always with a time clause (generally with ev): in Lk there is only one exception, 167%. The phrase was clearly therefore temporal originally, like our “It was in the days of... that...” (This is (c), but we could use the paratactic (a) form, or even (δ), without transgressing our idiom.) Driver (Zenses, ὃ 78) describes the ‘1 construction as occurring when there is inserted “a clause specifying the circumstances under which an action takes place,”—a descrip- tion which will suit the Lucan usage everywhere, except sometimes in the (6) class (as 16%), the only one of the three which has no Hebrew parallel. We must infer that the LXX translators used this locution as a just tolerable Greek which literally represented the original ;* and that Lk (and to a minute extent Mt and Mk) deliberately recalled the Greek OT by using the phrase. The (a) form is used else- where in the NT twice in Mk and five times in Mt, only in the phrase ἐγένετο ὅτε ἐτέλεσεν κτλ. Mt 910 has (Ὁ) and Mk 238 has (c). There are (a) forms with ἔσται Ac 217-21 323, Rom 976 (all OT citations); and (6) forms with γίνεται Mk 2%,
1 Once (Ac 1035), ἐγένετο τοῦ εἰσελθεῖν τὸν Πέτρον.
2 Blass cites Ac 4° D for (a), and finds (δ) in ὅ7. Certainly the latter sentence may be thus construed (see below, p. 70); nor is it a fatal objection that the construction is otherwise isolated in Ac. See p. 233.
5. Ἢ, F. Moulton (WM 760 n.) gives a number of LXX exx. for the (a) and (8) forms: the only approach to the (6) form is 2 Mac 816. qv... ὁρῶντα. .. τιτρώσκεσθαι.
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS. 17
ἐὰν γένηται Mt 18:8, and ὅπως μὴ γένηται Ac 20% Now in what sense is any of this to be called “Hebraism”? It is obvious that (δ) is a literal translation of the Hebrew, while it is at least grammatical as Greek, however unidiomatic. Its retention to a limited extent in Lk (with a single doubtful case in Ac), and absence elsewhere in NT (except for Mt 92°, which is affected by the author's love for καὶ ἰδού), are best interpreted as meaning that in free Greek it was rather an experiment, other constructions being preferred even by a writer who set himself to copy the LXX style. At first sight (a) would seem worse Greek still, but we must note that it is apparently known in ΜΟΥ: ef Pallis’s version of Mt 11}, καὶ συνέβηκε, σὰν τέλιωσε. . ,, ἔφυγε... ., etc. We cannot suppose that this is an inva- sion of Biblical Greek, any more than our own idiomatic “It happened I was at home that day.”' What then of (0), which is characteristic of Luke, and adopted by him in Ac as an exclusive substitute for the other two? It starts from Greek vernacular, beyond doubt. The normal Greek συνέβη still:takes what represents the acc. e¢ inf.: συνέβη ὅτι ἦρθε is idiomatic in modern Athenian speech, against ἔτυχε νὰ ἔλθῃ which, I am told, is commoner in the country districts. But ἐὰν γένηται with inf. was good contemporary vernacular : see AP 135, BM 970, and Pap. Catt. (in Archi 111. 60)—all ii/a.p. So was γίνεται (as Mk 2"): cf Par P 49 (ii/B.c.) γίνεται yap ἐντραπῆναι. From this to ἐγένετο is but a step, which Luke alone of NT writers seems to have taken:? the isolated ex. in Mk 238 is perhaps a primitive assimilation to Lk 61.8
1Cf Thumb’s remarks on this criterion of genuineness in vernacular suspected of Hebraism: ‘“‘ What appears Hebraism or Aramaism in the Bible must count as Greek if it shows itself as a natural development in the MGr vernacular” (Hellenismus 123).
2 An interesting suggestion is made by Prof. B. W. Bacon in Ezpos., April 1905, p. 174n., who thinks that the ‘‘Semitism” may be taken over from the ‘Gospel according to the Hebrews.” The secondary character of this Gospel, as judged from the extant fragments, has been sufficiently proved by Dr Adeney (Hibbert Journal, iii. pp. 139 ff.); but this does not prevent our positing un earlier and purer form as one of Luke’s sources. Bacon’s quotation for this is after the (a) form: ‘‘Factwm est autem, cum ascendisset . . ., descendit. . .” (No. 4 in Preuschen’s collection, Antilegomena, p. 4). The (a) form occurs in frag. 2 of the ‘‘ Ebionite Gospel ” (Preuschen, p. 9).
ὅ Tapa πορεύεσθαι (NALA al) may be a relic of Mk’s original text.
2
18 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
By this time we have perhaps dealt suf- ficiently with the principles involved, and may leave details of alleged Semitisms to their proper places in the grammar. We have seen that the problem is only complicated in the Lucan writings: else- where we have either pure vernacular or vernacular tempered with “translation Greek.” In Luke, the only NT writer except the author of Heb to show any conscious attention to Greek ideas of style, we find (1) rough Greek translations from Aramaic left mainly as they reached him, perhaps because their very roughness seemed too characteristic to be refined away; and (2) a very limited imitation of the LXX idiom, as specially appropriate while the story moves in the Jewish world. The conscious adaptation of his own style to that of sacred writings long current among his readers reminds us of the rule which restricted our nineteenth century Biblical Revisers to the English of the Elizabethan age. -
On the whole question, Thumb (p. 122) quotes with approval Deissmann’s dictum that “Semitisms which are in common use belong mostly to the technical language of reli- gion,” like that of our sermons and Sunday magazines. Such Semitisms “alter the scientific description of the language as little as did a few Latinisms, or other booty from the victorious march of Greek over the world around the Medi- terranean.”! In summing up thus the issue of the long strife over NT Hebraisms, we fully apprehend the danger of going too far. Semitic thought, whose native literary dress was necessarily foreign to the Hellenic genius, was bound to fall sometimes into un-Hellenic language as well as style. Moreover, if Deissmann has brought us a long way, we must not forget the complementary researches of Dalman, which have opened up a new world of possibilities in the scientific reconstruction of Aramaic originals, and have warned us of the importance of distinguishing very carefully between Semitisms from two widely different sources. What we can assert with assurance is that the papyri have finally destroyed the figment of a NT Greek which in any material respect differed from that spoken by ordinary
Conclusions as to Semitism.
1 Art, Hellenistisches Griechisch, in RE® vii. p. 638.
᾿ i mm ὉὉὉὉὉὉὉὦὁὃ,, ....-.-.  ..
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS. : 19
people in daily hfe throughout the Roman world. If the natural objection is raised that there must have been dialectic variation where people of very different races, scattered over an immense area, were learning the world language, and that “ Jewish-Greek ” is thus made an ὦ prwort certainty, we can meet the difficulty with a curiously complete modern parallel. Our own language is to-day spoken over a far vaster area; and we have only to ask to what extent dialect difference affects the modern Weltsprache. We find that pronuncia- tion and vocabulary exhaust between them nearly all the phenomena we could catalogue. Englishman, Scotchman, American, Colonial, granted a tolerable primary education, can interchange familiar letters without betraying except in trifles the dialect of their daily speech.* This fact should help us to realise how few local peculiarities can be expected to show themselves at such an interval in a language known to us solely from writing. We may add that a highly educated speaker of standard English, recognisable by his intonation as hailing from London, Edinburgh, or New York, can no longer thus be recognised when his words are written down. The comparison will help us to realise the impression made by the traveller Paul. [2 See p. 248. A special NT There is one general consideration which diction? must detain us a little at the close of this introductory chapter. Those who have
studied some recent work upon Hellenistic Greek, such as Blass’s brilliant Grammar of NT Greek, will probably be led to feel that modern methods result in a considerable levelling of distinctions, grammatical and lexical, on which the exegesis of the past has laid great stress. It seems necessary there- fore at the outset to put in a plea for caution, lest an exaggerated view should be taken of the extent to which our new lights alter our conceptions of the NT Janguage and its interpretation. We have been showing that the NT writers used the language of their time. But that does not mean that they had not in a very real sense a language of their own. Specific examples in which we feel bound to assert this for them will come up from time to time in our inquiry. In the light of the papyri and of MGr we are compelled to give up some grammatical scruples which figure largely in
20 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
great commentators like Westcott, and colour many passages of the RV. But it does not follow that,we must promptly obliterate every grammatical distinction that proves to have been unfamiliar to the daily conversation of the first century Egyptian farmer. We are in no danger now of reviving Hatch’s idea that phrases which could translate the same Hebrew must be equivalent to one another. The papyri have slain this very Euclid-like axiom, but they must not enslave us to others as dangerous. The NT must still be studied largely by light drawn from itself. Books written on the same subject and within the same circle must always gather some amount of identical style or idiom, a kind of technical terminology, which may often preserve a usage of earlier language, obso- lescent because not needed in more slovenly colloquial speech of the same time. The various conservatisms of our own religious dialect, even on the lips of uneducated people, may serve as a parallel up to a certain point. The comparative correctness and dignity of speech to which an unlettered man will rise in prayer, is a very familiar phenomenon, lending strong support to the expectation that even ὠγράμματοι would instinctively rise above their usual level of exactness in expression, when dealing with such high themes as those which fill the NT. We are justified by these considerations in examining each NT writer’s language first by itself, and then in connexion with that of his fellow-contributors to the sacred volume; and we may allow ourselves to retain the original force of distinctions which were dying or dead in every-day parlance, when there is a sufficient body of internal evidence. Of course we shall not be tempted to use this argument when the whole of our evidence denies a particular survival to Hellenistic vernacular: in such a case we could only find the locution as a definite literary revival, rarely possible in Luke and the writer to the Hebrews, and just conceivable in Paul.
It seems hardly worth while to discuss in a general way the supposition that Latin has influenced the Kown of the NT. In the borrowing of Latin words of course we can see activity enough, and there are even phrases literally translated, like λαβεῖν τὸ ἱκανόν Ac 17°; ποιεῖν τὸ t. Mk 15% (as early as
Note on Latinisms.
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS. 21
Polybius); μετὰ πολλὰς ταύτας ἡμέρας Ac 15, ete. But grammar we must regard as another matter, in spite of such collections as Buttmann’s (see his Index, sv. Latinisms) or Thayer's (Hastings’ DB ui. 40). It will suffice to refer to Prof. Thumb’s judgement (Hellenismus 152 ff.). Romans writ- ing Greek might be expected to have difficulties for example with the article’1—as I have noticed in the English efforts of Japanese boys at school in this country; but even of this there seems to be no very decisive proof. And though the bulk of the NT comes to us from authors with Roman names, no one will care to assert that Latin was the native language of Paul? or Luke or Mark. Apart from lexical matters, we may be content with a general negative. “Of any effective grammatical influence [of Latin] upon Greek there can be no question: at any rate I know nothing which could be instanced to this effect with any probability.” So says Dr Thumb, and the justification of his decision in each alleged. example may be safely left till the cases arise. It should of course be noted that Prof. Blass (p. 4) is rather more disposed to admit Latinisms in syntax. Greek and Latin were so constantly in contact throughout the history of the Kown, that the question of Latinisms in Greek or Graecisms in Latin must always le outside the range of really decisive auswer : ὃ our decision will turn largely on general impressions of the genius of each language, and for this point the specialist in Κοινή Greek seems better qualified than the specialist in the classical language.
1 Foreigners sometimes did find the article a stumbling-block: witness the long inscription of Antiochus 1 of Commagene, OGIS 383 (i/B.c.)—see Ditten- berger’s notes on p. 596 (vol. i.).
2 This does not involve denying that Paul could speak Latin: see the additional note to p. 7 (p. 233 below). ᾿
8 How inextricably bound together were the fortunes of Greek and Latin in the centuries following our era, is well shown in W. Schulze’s pamphlet, Graeca Latina. He does not, I think, prove any real action of Latin on Greek early enough to affect the NT, except for some mere trifles.
~
CHAPTER II. HISTORY OF THE “COMMON” GREEK.
WE proceed to examine the nature and history of the vernacular Greek itself. This is a study which has almost come into existence in the present generation. Classical scholars have studied the Hellenistic literature for the sake of its matter: its language was seldom considered worth noticing, except to chronicle contemptuously its deviations from “good Greek.” In so suffering, perhaps the authors only received the treatment they deserved; for to write Attic was the object of them all, pursued doubtless with varying degrees of zeal, but in all cases removing them far from the language they used in daily life. The pure study of the vernacular was hardly possible, for the Biblical Greek was interpreted on lines of its own, and the papyri were mostly reposing in their Egyptian tombs, the collections that were published receiving but little attention. (Cf above, p. 7n.) Equally unknown was the scientific study of modern Greek. To this day, even great philologists like Hatzidakis decry as a mere patois, utterly unfit for literary use, the living language upon whose history they have spent their lives. The translation of the Gospels into the Greek which descends directly from their original idiom, is treated as sacrilege by the devotees of a “ literary ” dialect which, in point of fact, no one ever spoke! It is left to foreigners to recognise the value of Pallis’s version for students who seek to understand NT Greek in the light of the continuous development of the language from the age of Alexander to our own time. See p. 243.
As has been hinted in the preceding paragraph, the materials for our present-day study of NT Greek are threefold :—(1) the prose literature
22
A New Study.
The Sources.
HISTORY OF THE “COMMON” GREEK. 23
of the post-classical period, from Polybius down, and includ- ing the LXX; (2) the Κοινή inscriptions, and the Egyptian non-literary papyri; (3) modern vernacular Greek, with especial reference to its dialectic variations, so far as these are at present registered. Before we discuss the part which each of these must play in our investigations, it will be necessary to ask what was the Κοινή and how it arose. We should premise that we use the name here as a convenient term for the spoken dialect of the period under review, using “literary Kown” and similar terms when the dialect of Polybius, Josephus, and the rest, is referred to. Whether this is the ancient use of the name we need not stay to examine τ the curious will find a paper on the subject by Prof. Jannaris in CA xvii. 93 ff., which may perhaps prove that he and we have misused the ancient grammarians’ phraseology. Οὐ φροντὶς ἹἹπποκλείδῃ. [5 See Ρ. 243. Greek and its The history, geography, and ethnology Dialects, οἱ Hellas are jointly responsible for the remarkable phenomena which even the
literature of the classical period presents. The very school- boy in his first two or three years at Greek has to realise that “Greek” is anything but a unity. He has not thumbed the Anabasis long before the merciful pedagogue takes him on to Homer, and his painfully acquired irregular verbs de- mand a great extension of their limits. When he develops into a Tripos candidate, he knows well that Homer, Pindar, Sappho, Herodotus and Aristotle are all of them in their several ways defiant of the Attic grammar to which his own composition must conform. And if his studies ultimately invade the dialect inscriptions,’ he finds in Elis and Heraclea, Lacedaemon and Thebes, Crete? and Cyprus, forms of Greek for which his literature has almost entirely failed to prepare him. Yet the Theban who said Fittw Aevs and the Athenian with his ἔστω Ζεύς lived in towns exactly as far apart as Liverpool and Manchester! The bewildering variety of dialects within that little country arises partly from racial
1 An extremely convenient little selection of dialect inscriptions is now available in the Teubner series :—Jnscriptiones Graecae ad inlustrandas Dialectos selectae, by Felix Solmsen. The book has less than 100 pp., but its contents might be relied on to perplex very tolerable scholars ! 7 See p. 288.
24 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
differences. Upon the indigenous population, represented best (it would seem) by the Athenians of history, swept first from Northern Europe! the hordes of Homer’s Achzans, and then, in post-Homeric days, the Dorian invaders. Dialectic conditions were as inevitably complex as they became in our own country a thousand years ago, when successive waves of Germanic invaders, of different tribes and dialects, had settled in the several parts of an island in which a Keltic population still maintained itself to greater or less extent. Had the Norman Conquest come before the Saxon, which determined the language of the country, the parallel would have been singularly complete. The conditions which in England were largely supplied by distance, were supplied in Greece by the mountain barriers which so effectively cut off each little State from regular communication with its neighbours—an effect and a cause at once of the passion for autonomy which made of Hellas a heptarchy of heptarchies. Survival ‘of ihe Meanwhile, a Steady process was going Fittest. on which determined finally the character of literary Greek. Sparta might win the hegemony of Greece at Aegospotami, and Thebes wrest it from her at Leuktra. But Sparta could not produce a man of letters,—Alkman (who was not a Spartan!) will serve as the exception that proves the rule; and Pindar, the lonely “Theban eagle,” knew better than to try poetic flights in Bootian. The intellectual supremacy of Athens was beyond challenge long before the political unification of Greece was accomplished; and Attic was firmly established as the only possible dialect for prose composition. The post-classical writers wrote Attic according to their lights, tempered generally with a plentiful admixture of gram- matical and lexical elements drawn from the vernacular, for which they had too hearty a contempt even to give it a name. Strenuous efforts were made by precisians to improve the Attic quality of this artificial literary dialect ; and we still possess the works of Atticists who cry out
11 am assuming as proved the thesis of Prof. Ridgeway’s Kurly Age of Greece, which seems to me a key that will unlock many problems of Greek history, religion, and language. Of course adhuc sub iudice lis est ; and with Prof. Thumb on the other side I should be sorry to dogmatise.

HISTORY OF THE “COMMON” GREEK. 25
against the “bad Greek” and “solecisms” of their con- temporaries, thus incidentally providing us with information concerning a Greek which interests us more than the artificial Attic they prized so highly. All their scrupulousness did not however prevent their deviating from Attic in matters more important than vocabulary. The optative in Lucian is perpetually misused, and no Atticist successfully attempts to reproduce the ancient use of οὐ and μή with the participle. Those writers who are less particular in their purism write in a literary Κοινή which admits without difficulty many features of various origin, while generally recalling Attic. No doubt the influence of Thucydides encouraged this freedom. The true Attic, as spoken by educated people in Athens, was hardly used in literature before iv/B.c.;1 while the Ionic dialect had largely influenced the some- what artificial idiom which the older writers at Athens used. It was not strange therefore that the standard for most of the post-classical writers should go back, for instance, to the πράσσω of Thucydides rather than the πράττω of Plato and Demosthenes. | Such, then, was the “Common Greek ” of literature, from which we have still to derive our illustrations for the NT to a very large extent. Any lexicon will show how important for our purpose is the vocabulary of the Koy writers, from Polybius down. And even the most rigid Atticists found themselves unable to avoid words and usages which Plato would not have recognised. But side by side with this was a fondness for obsolete words with literary associations. Take ναῦς, for. example, which is freely found in Aelian, Josephus, and other Κοινή writers: It does not appear in the indices of eight volumes of Grenfell and Hunt’s papyri—except where literary fragments come in,—nor in those to vol. iii of the Berlin collection and the small volume from Chicago. (I am naming all the collections that I happen to have by me.) We turn to the NT and find it once, and that is
Literary Κοινή.
1 Schwyzer, Die Weltsprachen des Altertums, p. 15 n., cites as the earliest extant prose monument of genuine Attic in literature, the pseudo-Xenophon’s De republica Atheniensi, which dates from before 413 B.c.
26 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
in Luke’s shipwreck narrative, in a phrase which Blass (Philology 186) suspects to be a reminiscence of Homer. In style and syntax the literary Common Greek diverges more widely from the colloquial. The bearing of all this on the subject of our study will come out frequently in the course of our investigations. Here it will suffice to refer to Blass, p. 5, for an interesting summary of phenomena which are practically restricted to the author of Heb, and to parts of Luke and Paul, where sundry lexical and grammatical elements from the literary dialect invade the colloquial style which is elsewhere universal in the NT. Modern The writers who figure in Dr W. “ Attic,” Schmid’s well-known book, Der Aétiismus, were not the last to found a literary lan- guage on the artificial resuscitation of the ancient Attic. Essentially the same thing is being tried in our time. “The purists of to-day,” says Thumb (Hellenismus 180), “are like the old Atticists to a hair.” Their “mummy- language,” as Krumbacher calls it, will not stand the test of use in poetry; but in prose literature, in newspapers, and in Biblical translation, it has the dominion, which is vindicated by Athenian undergraduates with bloodshed if need be We have nothing to do with this curious phenomenon, except to warn students that before citing MGr in illustration of the NT, they must make sure whether their source is καθαρεύουσα or ὁμιίλουμένη, book Greek or spoken Greek. The former may of course have borrowed from ancient or modern sources—for it is a medley far more mixed than we should get by compounding together Cynewulf and Kipling—the particular feature for which it is cited. But it obviously cannot stand in any line of his- torical development, and it is just as valuable as Volapiik to
1 In quoting Blass here, we do not accept unreservedly his opinion that Luke (Ac 20”) misused the literary word ἄφιξις, The Kow passages cited in Grimm-Thayer are at any rate ambiguous, and the misunderstanding of the ἀπό may have been no peculiarity of Luke’s. There is also the suggestion that Paul meant ‘‘after my arrival, home-coming.” For literary elements in NT writers, see especially E. Norden, Antike Kunstprosa ii. 482 ff.
2 See Krumbacher’s vigorous polemic, Das Problem d. neugr. Schriftsprache, summarised by the present writer in Exp 7 xiv. 550 ff. Hatzidakis replies with equal energy in REGr, 1908, pp. 210 ff., and further in an ᾿Απάντησις (1905).
HISTORY OF THE “COMMON” GREEK. OT
the student of linguistic evolution. The popular patois, on the other hand, is a living language, and we shall soon see that it takes a very important part in the discussions on which we are entering.
We pass on then to the spoken dialect of the first century Hellenists, its history and its peculiarities. Our sources are, in order of importance, (1) non-literary papyri, (2) inscriptions, (3) modern vernacular Greek. The literary sources are almost confined to the Biblical Greek. A few general words may be said on these sources, before we examine the origin of the Greek which they embody.
The papyri have one very obvious dis- advantage, in that, with the not very import- ant exception of Herculaneum,! their provenance is limited to one country, Egypt. We shall see, however, that the disadvantage does not practically count. They date from iii/B.c. to vii/a. The monuments of the earliest period are fairly abundant, and they give us specimens of the spoken Kowy from a time when the dialect was still a novelty. The papyri, to be sure, are not to be treated as a unity. Those which alone concern us come from the tombs and waste paper heaps of Ptolemaic and Roman Egypt; and their style has the same degree of unity as we should see in the contents of the sacks of waste paper sent to an English paper-mill from a solicitor’s office, a farm, a school, a shop, a manse, and a house in Downing Street. Each contribution has to be considered separately. Wills, law-reports, contracts, census- returns, marriage - settlements, receipts and official orders largely ran along stereotyped lines; and, as formule tend to be permanent, we have a degree of conservatism in the language which is not seen in documents free from these trammels. Petitions contain this element in greater or less extent, but naturally show more freedom in the recitation of the particular grievances for which redress is claimed. Private letters are our most valuable sources; and they are all the better for the immense differences that betray
First Century Κοινή : Sources.
(1) Papyri.
—
1 On these see the monumental work of W. Croénert, Memoria Graeca Her- culanensis (Teubner, 1903).
28 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
themselves in the education of their writers. The well-worn epistolary formule show variety mostly in their spelling; and their value for the student lies primarily in their remarkable resemblances to the conventional phraseology which even the NT letter-writers were content to use That part of the letter which is free from formule is perhaps most instructive when its grammar is weakest, for it shows which way the language was tending. Few papyri are more suggestive than the letter of the lower-school-boy to his father, OP 119 (ii/iii a.p.). It would have surprised Theon pére, when he applied the well-merited cane, to learn that seventeen centuries afterwards there might be scholars who would count his boy’s audacious missive greater treasure than a new fragment of Sappho! But this is by the way. It must not be inferred from our laudation of the ungrammatical papyri that the NT writers are at all comparable to these scribes in lack of education. The indifference to concord, which we noted in Rev, is almost isolated in this connexion. But the illiterates show us by their exaggerations the tendencies which the better schooled writers keep in restraint. With writings from farmers and from emperors, and every class between, we can form a kind of “grammatometer” by which to estimate how the language stands in the development of any particular use we may wish to investigate.
Inscriptions come second to papyri, in this connexion, mainly because their very material shows that they were meant to last. Their Greek may not be of the purest; but we see it, such as it is, in its best clothes, while that of the papyri is in corduroys. The special value of the Common Greek inscriptions lies in their corroborat- ing the papyri, for they practically show that there was but little dialectic difference between the Greek of Egypt and that of Asia Minor, Italy, and Syria. There would probably be varieties of pronunciation, and we have evidence that districts differed in their preferences among sundry equivalent locutions; but a speaker of Greek would be understood without the slightest difficulty wherever he went throughout the immense area
(2) Inscriptions.
1On this point see Deissmann, BS 21 ff.; J. R. Harris, in Expos. Vv. viii. 161 ff.; G. G. Findlay, Thess. (CGT), Ἰχὶ. ; Robinson, Eph. 275-284.
HISTORY OF THE “COMMON” GREEK. 29
over which the Greek world-speech reigned. With the caveat already implied, that inscription-Greek may contain literary elements which are absent from an unstudied private letter, we may use without misgiving the immense and ever-growing collections of later Greek epigraphy. How much may be made of them is well seen in the Prewschrift of Dr E. Schwyzer, Grammatik der Pergamenischen Inschriften, an invaluable guide to the accidence of the Kosvy. (It has been followed up by E. Nachmanson in his Laute und Formen der Magnetischen Inschriften (1903), which does the same work, section by section, for the corpus from Magnesia.) Next to the papyrus collections, there is no tool the student of the NT Κοινή will find so useful as a book of late inscriptions, such as Dittenberger’s new Orientis Graect Inscriptiones selectae.” (3) Modern ᾿ Finally we have MGr to bring in. The Greek. iscovery that the vernacular of to-day goes back historically to the Kow7 was made in 1834 by Heilmaier, in a book on the origin of the “Romaic.” This discovery once established, it became clear that we could work back from MGr to reconstruct the otherwise imperfectly known oral Greek of the Hellenistic age.® It is however only in the last generation that the importance of this method has been adequately recognised. We had not indeed till recently acquired trustworthy materials. Mullach’s grammar, upon which the editor of Winer had to depend for one of the most fruitful innovations of his work,‘ started from wrong premisses as to the relation between the old language and the new. We have now, in such books
1 He was Schweizer in 1898, when this book was published, but has changed since, to our confusion. He has edited Meisterhans’ Grammatik der attischen Inschriften®, and written the interesting lecture on Die Weltsprache named above.
2The appearance of vol. ii. has made it many times more valuable by the provision of a word-index, and an excellent conspectus of grammatical peculiarities.
81 cite from Kretschmer, Die Entstehung der Κοινή, p. 4.
‘Cf WM index s.v. ‘‘ Greek (modern),” p. 824.
δ Cf Krumbacher in KZ xxvii. 488. Krumbacher uses the epithet ‘‘dilet- tante”’ about Mullach, ἐδ. p. 497, but rather (I fancy) for his theories than his facts. After all, Mullach came too early to be blameworthy for his unscientific position.
30 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
as Thumb’s Handbuch der neugriechischen Volkssprache and Hatzidakis’s Kinlettung in die neugriechische Grammatik, the means of checking not a few statements about MGr which were really based on the artificial Greek of the schools. The per- petual references to the NT in the latter work will indicate forcibly how many of the developments of modern vernacular had their roots in that of two thousand years ago. The gulf between the ancient and the modern is bridged by the material collected and arranged by Jannaris in his Historical Greek Grammar. The study of a Gospel in the vernacular version of Pallis! will at first produce the impression that the gulf is very wide indeed; but the strong points of con- tact will become very evident in time. Hatzidakis indeed even goes so far as to assert that “the language generally spoken to-day in the towns differs less from the common language of Polybius than this last differs from the language of Homer.” 3
The Birth of the Κοινή.
We are now ready to enquire how this Common Greek of the NT rose out of the classical language. Some features of its development are undoubted, and may be noted first. The impulse which produced it lay, beyond question, in the work of Alexander the Great. The unification of Hellas was a necessary first step in the accomplishment of his dream of Hellenising the world which he had marked out for conquest. To achieve unity of speech throughout the little country which his father’s diplomatic and military triumphs had virtually conquered for him, was a task too serious for Alexander himself to face. But unconsciously he effected this, as a by-product of his-colossal achievement; and the next generation found that not only had a common language emerged from the chaos of Hellenic dialects, but a new and
1 Ἢ. Νέα Διαθήκη, μεταφρασμένη ἀπὸ τὸν ᾿Αλεξ. Πάλλη (Liverpool, 1902), (Pallis has now translated the Z/iad, and even some οὗ Kant—with striking success, in Thumb’s opinion, DZZ, 1905, pp. 2084-6.) Unfortunately the B.F.B.S. version contains so much of the artificial Greek that it is beyond the comprehension of the common people: the bitter prejudice of the educated classes at present has closed the door even to this, much more to Pallis’s version.
3 REGr, 1908, p. 220. (See ἃ further note below, pp. 2881.)
HISTORY OF THE “COMMON” GREEK. 31
nearly homogeneous world-speech had been created, in which Persian and Egyptian might do business together, and Roman proconsuls issue their commands to the subjects of a mightier empire than Alexander's own. His army was in itself a powerful agent in the levelling process which ulti- mately destroyed nearly all the Greek dialects. The Anabasis of the Ten Thousand Greeks, seventy years before, had doubtless produced results of the same kind on a small scale. Clearchus the Lacedaemonian, Menon the Thessalian, Socrates the Arcadian, Proxenus the Bceotian, and the rest, would find it difficult to preserve their native brogue very long free from the solvent influences of perpetual association during their march; and when Cheirisophus of Sparta and Xenophon of Athens had safely brought the host home, it is not strange that the historian himself had suffered in the purity of his Attic, which has some peculiarities distinctly foreshadowing the Kow7.' The assimilating process would go much further in the camp of Alexander, where, during prolonged campaigns, men from all parts of Greece were tent-fellows and messmates, with no choice but to accom- modate their mode of speech in its more individual character- istics to the average Greek which was gradually being evolved among their comrades. In this process naturally those features which were peculiar to a single dialect would have the smallest chance of surviving, and those which most successfully combined the characteristics of many dialects would be surest of a place in the resultant “common speech.” The army by itself only furnished a nucleus for the new growth. As Hellenism swept victoriously into Asia, and established itself on all the shores of the eastern Mediterranean, the mixture of nationalities in the new-rising communities de- manded a common language as the medium of intercourse,
1Cf Rutherford, VP 160-174. The same may be said of the language of the lower classes in Athens herself in v/B.c., consisting as they did of immigrants from all parts. So [Xenophon] Constitution of Athens 11. 8:—‘'The Greeks have an individual dialect, and manner of life and fashion of their own; but the Athenians have what is compounded from all the Greeks and barbarians.” The vase-inscriptions abundantly evidence this. (Kretschmer, Entstehung d. Κοινή, p. 84.) The importance of Xenophon as a forerunner of Hellenism is well brought out by Mahaffy, Progress of Hellenism in Alexander's Empire, Lecture i. |
32 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
and the Greek of the victorious armies of Alexander was -ready for the purpose. In the country districts of the motherland, the old dialects lived on for generations; but by this time Greece herself was only one factor in the great Hellenising movement to which the world was to owe 80 much. Besides, the dialects which strikingly differed from the new Kowy were spoken by races that mostly lay outside the movement. History gives an almost pathetic interest to an inscription like that from Larissa (Michel 41—end of iii/B.c.), where the citizens record a rescript from King Philip v, and their own consequent resolutions :—
Ταγευόντουν ᾿Αναγκίπποι Πετθαλείοι «.7.d., Φιλίπποι Tot βασιλεῖος ἐπιστολὰν ἀπυστέλλαντος πὸτ τὸς ταγὸς καὶ τὰν πόλιν τὰν ὑπογεγραμμέναν'
Βασιλεὺς Φίλιππος Λαρισαίων τοῖς ταγοῖς καὶ τῆι πόλει χαίρειν (and so on in normal Κοινὴ).
The old and the new survived thus side by side into the imperial age; but Christianity had only a brief opportunity of speaking in the old dialects of Greece. In one corner of Hellas alone did the dialect live on. To-day scholars recognise a single modern idiom, the Zaconian, which does not directly descend from the Κοινή As we might expect, this is nothing but the ancient Laconian, whose broad ἃ holds its ground still in the speech of a race impervious to literature and proudly con- servative of a language that was always abnormal to an extreme. Apart from this the dialects died out entirely.* They contributed their share to the resultant Common Greek ; but it is an assured result of MGr philology that there are no elements of speech whatever now existing, due to the ancient dialects, which did not find their way into the stream of development through the channel of the vernacular Κοινή of more than two thousand years ago. [5 See p. 243.
So far we may go without difference Relative Contri- 4¢ opinion. The only serious dispute arises butions to the . . Resultant, When we ask what were the relative magni- tudes of the contributions of the several
dialects to the new resultant speech. That the literary Κοινή was predominantly Attic has been already stated, and is of course beyond doubt. But was Attic more than one
Decay of the Dialects.
HISTORY OF THE “COMMON ” GREEK. 33
among many elements assimilated in the new vernacular ? It has always been taken for granted that the intellectual queen of Greece was the predominant partner in the busi- ness of establishing a new dialect based on a combination of the old ones. This conclusion has recently been challenged by Dr Paul Kretschmer, a brilliant comparative philologist, previously distinguished for his studies on the language of the Greek vase-inscriptions and on the dialects of the Greeks’ nearest neighbours: In his tractate entitled Die Entstehung der Κοινή, published in the Transactions of the Vienna Academy for 1900, he undertook to show that the oral Kown contained elements from Beotian, Ionic, and even North-west Greek, to a larger extent than from Attic. His argument affects pronunciation mainly. That Beotian monophthongising of the diphthongs, Doric softening of 8, δ and γ, and Ionic de-aspiration of words beginning with A, affected the spoken language more than any Attic influence of this nature, might perhaps be allowed. But when we turn to features which had to be represented in writing, as contrasted with mere variant pronunciations of the same written word, the case becomes less striking. Bceotians may have supplied 3 plur. forms in -cav for imperfect and optative, but these do not appear to any considerable extent outside the LXX: the NT exx. are precarious, and they are surprisingly rare in the papyri.2, North-west Greek has the accusative plural in -es, found freely in papyri and (for the word τέσσαρες) in MSS of the NT; also the middle conjugation of εἰμί, and the confusion of forms from -ἄω and -éw verbs. Doric contri- butes some guttural forms from verbs in -ζω, and a few lexical items. Tonic supplies a fair number of isolated forms, and may be responsible for many -w or -ὦ flexions from -μὲ verbs, and some uncontracted noun-forms like ὀστέων or χρυσέῳ: But the one peculiarly Attic feature of the Kown which Kretschmer does allow, its treatment of original a, in contrast with Ionic phonology on one side and that of the remaining dialects on the other, is so far-reaching in its effects
1 Die griech. Vaseninschriften, 1894 ; Hinlettung in die Geschichte der griech. Sprache, 1896. 2 See CR xv. 36, and the addenda in xviii. 110,
3
94 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
that we cannot but give it more weight than to any other feature. And while the accidence of Attic has bequeathed to the vernacular much matter which it shared with other dialects, one may question whether the accidence of any single dialect would present anything like the same similarity to that of the Κοινή as the Attic does. We can hardly resist the conclusion of the experts that Kretschmer has failed to prove his point. At the same time we may allow that the influence of the other dialects on pronunciation has been commonly underestimated. Kretschmer necessarily recognises that Attic supplied the orthography of the Κοινή, except for those uneducated persons to whom we owe so much for their instructive mis-spellings. Consequently, he says, when the Hellenist wrote χαίρει and pronounced it chéri, his language was really Boeotian and not Attic! Itis obvious that the question does not seriously concern us, since we are dealing with a language which, despite its vernacular character, comes to us in a written and therefore largely Atticised form.” For our purpose we may assume that we have before us a Greek which includes important contributions from various dialects, but with Attic as the basis, although the exclusive peculiarities of Attic make but a small show in it. We shall see later on (pp. 213ff.) that syntax tells a clearer story in at least one matter of importance, the articular infinitive. — At this point it should be observed that alent pronunciation is not to be passed over as a Tradition. matter of no practical importance by the modern student of Hellenistic. The undeni- able fact that phonetic spelling—which during the reign of the old dialects was a blessing common to all—was entirely abandoned by educated people generations before the Christian era, has some very obvious results for both grammar and textual criticism. That az and e, ev (7) and ε, ot and v were identities for the scribes of our MSS, is certain.2 The scribe made his choice according to the grammar and the sense,
1 Against this emphasising of Boeotian, see Thumb, Hellenismus 228.
2 On the date of the levelling of quantity, so notable a feature in ΜΟΥ, see Hatzidakis in ’A@nva for 1901 (xiii. 247). He decides that it began outside Greece, and established itself very gradually. It must have been complete, or nearly so, before the scribes of & and B wrote. [5 See p. 243.
HISTORY OF THE “COMMON” GREEK. 35
just as we choose between kings, king’s, and kings’, or between bow and bough. He wrote σύ nominative and coi dative; λύσασθαι infinitive and λύσασθε imperative; φιλεῖς, εἴδομεν indicative, and φιλῇς, ἴδωμεν subjunctive ; βούλει verb, but βουλῇ noun—here of course there was the accentual difference, if he wrote to dictation. There was nothing however to prevent him from writing ἐξέφνης, ἐφνίδιος, ἀφειρημένος, etc., if his antiquarian knowledge failed; while there were times when his choice between (for example) infinitive and imperative, as in Lk 19, was determined only by his own or perhaps a traditional exegesis. It will be seen therefore that we cannot regard our best MSS as decisive on such questions, except as far as we may see reason to trust their general accuracy in grammatical tradition. WH may be justified in printing ἵνα... ἐπισκιάσει in Ac 5%, after B and some cursives; but the passage is wholly useless for any argument as to the use of ἵνα with a future. Or let us take the constructions of οὐ μή as exhibited for WH text in the concordance (MG). There are 71 occurrences with aor. subj..and 2 more in which the -ow might theoretically be future. Against these we find 8 cases of the future, and 15 in which the parsing depends on our choice between e and 7. It is evident that editors cannot hope to decide here what was the autograph spelling. Even supposing they had the autograph before them, it would be no evidence as to the author’s grammar if he dictated the text. To this we may add that by the time δὲ and B were written o and ὦ were no longer distinct in pronunciation, which transfers two more cases to the list of the indeterminates. It is not therefore simply the overwhelming manuscript authority which decides us for ἔχωμεν in Rom 54. Without the help of the versions and patristic citations, it would be difficult to prove that the orthography of the MSS is really based on a very ancient traditional interpretation. It is indeed quite possible that the Apostle’s own pronunciation did not distinguish o and ὦ sufficiently to give Tertius a clear lead, without his making inquiry. In all these matters we may fairly recognise a
19 and w were confused in various quarters before this date: cf Schwyzer, Pergam. 95; Nachmanson, Magnet. 64; Thumb, Hellenismus 143. We have
96 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
case nearly parallel with the editor’s choice between such alternatives as tives and τινές in Heb 316, where the tradition varies. The modern expositor feels himself entirely at liberty to decide according to his view of the context. . On our choice in Rom, l.c., see below, (p. 110). ve ae Before we leave dialectology, it may be NW Grock well to make a few more remarks on the nature of the contributions which we have noted. Some surprise may be felt at the importance of the elements alleged to have been brought into the language by the “North-west Greek,”! which lies altogether outside the literary limits. The group embraces as its main consti- tuents the dialects of Epirus, Aetolia, Locris and Phokis, and Achaia, and is known to us only from inscriptions, amongst which those of Delphi are conspicuous. It is the very last we should have expected to influence the resultant language, but it is soon observed that its part (on Kretschmer’s theory) has been very marked. The characteristic Achaian accus.
_ plur. in -es successfully established itself in the common
Greek, as its presence in the vernacular of to-day sufficiently shows. Its prominence in the papyri” indicates that it was making a good fight, whieh in the case of τέσσαρες had already become a fairly assured victory. In the NT τέσσαρας never occurs without some excellent authority for τέσσαρες : ὃ ef WH App 150.” Moreover we find that A, in Rev 1%, has aorépes—with omission of ἔχων, it is true, but this may well be an effort to mend the grammar. It is of course impossible to build on this example; but taking into account the obvious fact that the author of Rev was still decidedly ἀγράμματος in Greek, and remembering the similar phen- omena of the papyri, we might expect his autograph to exhibit accusatives in -es, and in other instances beside τέσσαρες. The middle conjugation of εἰμέ is given by

confusion of this very word in BU 607 (ii/a.p.). Par P 40 (ii/B.c.), with ὥντος, Μακεδώνος, etc., shows us how early this begins with illiterates. See also p. 244. 1 Brugmann, Gr. Gramm.? 17. [6 See pp. 248 f. 2 See CR xv. 34, 435, xviii. 109. I must acknowledge a curious mistake I made there in citing Dr Thumb for, instead of against, Kretschmer’s argument on this point. 8. Jn 11 4 A; Ac 27” and Rev 915 x; Rev 4κ A (WHmzg), 7! A bis P semel.
HISTORY OF THE “COMMON” GREEK. 37
Kretschmer as a NW Greek feature; but the Delphian ἧται and ἔωνται are balanced by Messenian ἦνται and Lesbian ἔσσο, which looks as if some middle forms had existed in the earliest Greek. But the confusion of the -dw and -éw verbs, which is frequent in the papyri! and NT, and is complete in MGr, may well have come from the NW Greek, though encouraged by Ionic. We cannot attempt here to discuss the question between Thumb and Kretschmer; but an ὦ priors argument might be found for the latter in the well-known. fact that between iii/ and i/s.c. the political importance of Aetolia and Achaia produced an Achaian-Dorian Κοινή, which yielded to the wider Kovvy about a hundred years before Paul began to write: it seems antecedently probable that this dialect would leave some traces on that which superseded it. Possibly the extension of the 3rd plur. -cav, and even the perfect -av, may be due to the same source:? the former is also Bootian. The peculiarities just mentioned have in common their sporadic acceptance in the Hellenistic of i/a.p., which is just what we should expect where a dialect like this contended for survival with one that had already spread over a very large area. The elements we have tentatively set down to the NW Greek secured their ultimate victory through their practical convenience. The fusion of -dw and -éw verbs amalgamated two grammatical categories which served no useful purpose by their distinctness. The acous. in -es reduced the number of case-forms to be remembered, at the cost of a confusion which English bears without difficulty, and even Attic bore in πόλεις, βασιλεῖς, πλείους, etc.; while the other novelties both reduced the tale of equivalent suffixes and (in the case of -cav) provided a useful means of distinction between 1st sing. and 3rd plur.
We come to securer ground when we estimate the part taken by Ionic in the formation of the Κοινή, for here Thumb and Kretschmer are at one. The former shows that we cannot safely trace any feature of Common Greek to the influence of some
and of Ionic.
1 See CR xv. 36, 435, xviii. 110. Thumb suggests that the common aor. in -noa started the process of fusion.
2 The -σαν suffix is found in Delphian (Valaori, Delph. Dial. 60) rather pro- minently, both in indic. and opt. The case for -αν (ibid. ) is weaker.
98 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
particular dialect, unless it appears in that dialect as a distinct new type, and not a mere survival. The nouns in -ὥς -ados and -ois -oddos are by this principle recognised as a clear debt of MGr to Ionic elements in the Koevy. Like the other elements which came from a single ancient dialect, they had to struggle for existence. We find them in the Egyptian Greek; but in the NT -ds makes gen. -ὦ, as often even in Asia Minor, where naturally -ad0s was at home.! Kretschmer gives as Ionic factors in the Kowy the forms κιθών (-- χιτών) and the like? psilosis (which the Ionians shared with their Aeolic neighbours), the uncontracted noun and verb forms already alluded to, and the invasion of the -~t verbs by thematic forms (contract or ordinary). He explains the declension σπεῖρα σπείρης (normal in the Κοινή from i/B.c.) as due not to Ionism, but to the analogy of γλῶσσα γλώσσης. To his argument on this point we might add the consideration that the declension -ρᾶὰ -pys is both earlier and more stable than -véa -vins, a difference which I would connect with the fact that the combination ey continued to be barred in Attic at a time when ρη (from ρα) was no longer objected to (contrast ὑγιᾷ and κόρη) “ if Ionic forms had been simply taken over, esSvins would have come in as early as σπείρης. But such discussion may be left to the ence philological journals. What concerns the NT persist? student is the question of dialectic varieties within the Κουνή itself rather than in its previous history. Are we to expect persistence of Ionic features in Asia Minor; and will the Greek of Egypt, Syria,

1 But -ἄδος is rare both at Pergamum and at Magnesia: Schwyzer 189f., Nachmanson 120. ©
2 Κιθών, κύθρα and ἐνθαῦτα occur not seldom in papyri; and it is rather curious that they are practically absent from NT MSS. I can only find in Ti χειθῶνας Ὁ" (Mt 10!) and κιτῶνας B* (Mk 14°—“‘ut alibi x,” says the editor). Ké@pa occurs in Clem. Rom. 17 fin. (see Lightfoot). Bdé@paxos, which is found in ΜΟῚ (as Abbott 56) I cannot trace, nor πάθνη. Cf Hatzidakis 160 f. 8 The perfect fwxa from ἴημι (NT ἀφέωνται) is noted as Ionic rather than Doric by Thumb, 7ALZ xxviii. 421'n. Since this was a prehistoric form (cf Gothic saisé from sata, ‘‘sow’’), we cannot determine the question certainly. But note that the imperative ἀφεώσθω occurs in an Arcadian inscription (Michel 685'°—iii/?n.c.). Its survival in Hellenistic is the more easily understood, if it really existed in two or three dialects of the classical period. [*See p. 244.
HISTORY OF THE “COMMON” GREEK. 39
Macedonia, and Italy differ to an extent which we can detect after two thousand years? Speaking generally, we may reply in the negative. Dialectic differences there must have been in a language spoken over so large an area. But they need not theoretically be greater than those between British and American English, to refer again to the helpful parallel we examined above (p. 19). We saw there that in the modern Weltsprache the educated colloquial closely approxi- mates everywhere when written down, differing locally to some extent, but in vocabulary and orthography rather than in grammar. The uneducated vernacular differs more, but its differences still show least in the grammar. The study of the papyri and the Κοινή inscriptions of. Asia Minor dis- closes essentially the same phenomena in Hellenistic. There are few points of grammar in which the NT language differs from that which we see in other specimens of Common Greek vernacular, from whatever province derived. We have already mentioned instances in which what may have been quite possible Hellenistic is heavily overworked because it happens to coincide with'a Semitic idiom. Apart from these, we have a few small matters in which the NT differs from the usage of the papyri. The weakening of οὐ μή is the most important of these, for certainly the papyri lend no coun- tenance whatever to any theory that οὐ μή was a normal unemphatic negative in Hellenistic. We shall return to this at a later stage (see pp. 187 ff.); but meanwhile we may note that in the NT οὐ μή seems nearly always connected with “translation Greek”—the places where no Semitic original can be suspected show it only in the very emphatic sense which is common to classical and Hellenistic use. Among smaller points are the NT construction of évoyos with gen. of penalty, and the prevailing use of ἀπεκρίθην for ἀπεκρι- vapnv: in both of these the papyri wholly or mainly agree with the classical usage; but that in the latter case the NT has good Hellenistic warrant, is shown by Phrynichus (see Rutherford, VP 186 ff.), by the witness of Polybius, and by the MGr ἀποκρίθηκα.
, . The whole question of dialectic differ- Thumbs Verdict. ces within the spoken Kowvy is judicially summed up by our greatest living authority, Dr Albert
40 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
Thumb, in chap. v. of his book on Greek in the Hel- lenistic Age, already often quoted. He thinks that such differences must have existed largely, in Asia Minor especially ; but that writings like the Greek Bible, intended for general circulation, employed a Durchschnittsprache which avoided local peculiarities, though intended for single localities. (The letters of Paul are no exception to this rule, for he could not be familiar with the peculiarities of Galatian or Achaian, still less of Roman, Kown.) To the question whether our autho- rities are right in speaking of a special Alexandrian Greek, Thumb practically returns a negative. For nearly all the purposes of our own special study, Hellenistic Greek may be regarded as a unity, hardly varying except with the education of the writer, his tendency to use or ignore specialities of literary language, and the degree of his dependence upon foreign originals which might be either freely or slavishly rendered into the current Greek.
It is however to be noted that the minute dialectic differences which can be detected in NT Greek are some- times significant to the literary critic. In an article in ThALZ, 1903, p. 421, Thumb calls attention to the promin- ence of ἐμός in Jn, as against mov elsewhere? He tells us that ἐμός and its like survive in modern Pontic-Cappadocian Greek, while the gen. of the personal pronoun has replaced it in other parts of the Greek-speaking area. This circumstance contributes something to the evidence that the Fourth Gospel came from Asia Minor. We might add that on the same showing Luke should come from Macedonia, or some other country outside Asia Minor, for he hardly uses ἐμός ; while Rev, in which out of the four possessive pronouns ἐμός alone occurs, and that but once, seems to be from the pen of a recent immigrant. Valeat quantum! In the same paper Thumb shows that the infinitive still survives in Pontic,

1 Cf Blass 4 n.
2 Ἐμός occurs 36 times in Jn, once each in ὃ Jn and Rev, and 34 times in the rest of the NT. It must be admitted that the other possessives do not tell the same story: the three together appear 11 times in Jn (Ev and Epp), 12 in Lk, and 21 in the rest of NT. Blass (p. 168) notes how ὑμῶν in Paul (in the position of the attribute) ousts the emphatic ὑμέτερος. (For that position cf ἡ σοὺ οὐσία, Mithraslit. p. 17 and note.)
HISTORY OF THE “COMMON” GREEK. 41
while in Greece proper it yields entirely to the periphrasis. The syntactical conditions under which the infinitive is found in Pontic answer very well to those which appear in the NT: in such uses Western Greek tended to enlarge the sphere of ἵνα. This test, applied to Jn, rather neutralises that from ἐμός : see below, p. 205, 211. Probably the careful study of local MGr patois will reveal more of these minutiz. Another field for research is presented by the orthographical peculiarities of the NT uncials, which, in comparison with the papyri and inscriptions, will help to fix the provenance of the MSS, and thus supply criteria for that localising of textual types which is an indispensable step towards the ultimate goal of criticism.!
1Qne or two hints in this direction are given by Thumb, Hellenismus 179. Cf Prof. K. Lake’s remarks on the problems awaiting us in textual criticism, in his inaugural lecture at Leiden (Oxford, 1904). See also p. 244,
CHAPTER 111. NOTES ON THE ACCIDENCE.
BEFORE we begin to examine the conditions of Hellenistic syntax, we must devote a short chapter to the accidence. To treat the forms in any detail would be obviously out of place in these Prolegomena. The humble but necessary work of gathering into small compass the accidence of the NT writers I have done in my little Introduction (see above, p. 1 n.); and it will have to be done again more minutely in the second part of this Grammar. In the present chapter we shall try to prepare ourselves for answering a preliminary question of great importance, viz., what was the position occupied by the NT writers between the literary and illiterate Greek of their time. For this purpose the forms give us a more easily applied test than the syntax. But before we can use them we must make sure that we have them substantially as they stood in the autographs. May not such MSS as δὲ and B— and D still more—have conformed their orthography to the popular style, just as those of the “Syrian” revision con- formed it in some respects to the literary standards? We cannot give a universal answer to this question, for we have seen already that an artificial orthography left the door open for not a few uncertainties. But there are some suggestive signs that the great uncials, in this respect as in others, are not far away from the autographs. A very instruc- tive phenomenon is the curious substitution of ἐάν for ἄν after ὅς, ὅπου, etc., which WH have faithfully reproduced in numberless places from the MSS. This was so little recog- nised as a genuine feature of vernacular Greek, that the editors of the volumes of papyri began by gravely subscribing “1, av” wherever the abnormal ἐάν showed itself. They 42
The Uncials and the Papyri.
NOTES ON THE ACCIDENCE. 43
were soon compelled to save themselves the trouble. Deiss- mann, BS 204, gave a considerable list from the papyri, which abundantly proved the genuineness of this ἐάν; and four years later (1901) the material had grown so much that it was possible to determine the time-limits of the peculiarity with fair certainty. If my count is right; the proportion of ἐάν to ἄν is 13: 29 in papyri dated B.c. The proportion was soon reversed, the figures being 25:7 for i/a.v., 76:9 for ii/, 9:3 for iii/, 4:8 for iv/. This ἐάν occurs last in a vi/ papyrus. It will be seen that the above construction was specially common in i/ and ii/, when ἐάν greatly predominated, and that the fashion had almost died away before the great uncials were written. It seems that in this small point the uncials faithfully reproduce originals written under conditions long obsolete.* This particular example affords us a very fair test; but we may reinforce it with a variety of cases where the MSS accurately reproduce the spelling of i/a. We will follow the order of the material in WH App 141 ff (“Notes on Orthography ”): it is unnecessary to give detailed references for the papyrus evidence, which will be found fully stated in the papers from CR, already cited. We must bear in mind throughout Hort’s caution (p. 141) that “all our MSS have to a greater or less extent suffered from the
1 ΟἹ xv. 82, xv. 484: for the exx. B.c. I have added figures from papyri subsequently read. I am sorry I cannot now complete the statistics. See further on p. 234.
2 The case of ἄν, tf, is separate. In the NT this is confined apparently to Jn, where it occurs six times. In the papyri itis decidedly a symptom of illiteracy. With this agrees what Meisterhans® 255 f. says: ‘‘Only six times is ἄν found from v/ to iii/B.o. The form ἄν is entirely foreign to the Attic inscrip- tions, though it is often found in the Ionicising literary prose of v/ (Thucydides: cf the Tragedians).” Since ἄν is the modern form, we may perhaps regard it as a dialectic variant which ultimately ousted the Attic ἐάν. It is not clear to what dialect it is to be assigned. Against Meisterhans’ suggestion of Ionic stands the opinion of H. W. Smyth (Zonie Dialect, p. 609) ᾿ that its occasional appearances in Ionic are due to Atticising! Certainly ἤν is the normal Ionic form, but ἄν may have been Ionic as well, though rarer. (So Mr P. Giles.) Nachmanson (p. 68) gives ἐάν as the only form from Magnesia. Some peculiar local distribution is needed to explain why ἄν (7f) is absent from the incorrectly written Rev, and reserved for the correct Jn. Both dy and ἐάν are found promiscuously in the Herculaneum rolls (Cronert 130).

44 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
effacement of unclassical forms of words.” Note also his statement that the “Western” MSS show the reverse tendency. “The orthography of common life, which to a certain extent was used by all the writers of the NT, though in unequal degrees, would naturally be introduced more freely in texts affected by an instinct of popular adaptation.” He would be a bold man who should claim that even Hort has said the last word on the problem of the 5-text; and with our new knowledge of the essentially popular character of NT Greek as a whole, we shall naturally pay special attention to documents which desert the classical spelling for that which we find prevailing in those papyri that were written by men of education approximately parallel with that of the apostolic writers.
We begin with the “unusual aspirated ms” (p. 143), ἐφ᾽ ἑλπίδι etc., καθ᾽ ἱδίαν, ἄφιδε etc., and οὐχ oAlyos.” For all these there is a large body of evidence from papyri and inscriptions. There are a good many other words affected thus, the commonest of which, ἔτος, shows no trace of the aspiration in NT uncials. Sins of commission as well as omission seem to be inevitable when initial % has become as weak as in later Greek or in modern English. Hence in a period when de-aspiration was the prevailing tendency, analogy produced some cases of reaction,—«a0’ éros due to καθ᾽ ἡμέραν, adide to ἀφορᾶν, etc.;1 and the two types struggled for survival. MGr ἐφέτο shows that the aspirated form did not always yield. The uncertainty of the MS spelling thus naturally follows from the history of the aspirate. It is here impossible to determine the spelling of the autographs, but the wisdom of following the great uncials becomes clearer as we go on. The reverse phenomenon, psilosis, exx. of which figure on p. 144, is part of the general tendency which started from the Ionic and Aeolic of Asia Minor and became universal, as MGr shows. The mention of ταμεῖον (p. 146—add πεῖν from
Orthography. for
1The curious coincidence that many, but by no means all, of these words once began with F, led to the fancy (repeated by Hort) that the lost con- sonant had to do with the aspiration. I need not stay to explain why this cannot be accepted. The explanation by analogy within the Κοινή is that favoured by Thumb. (See additional note, p. 234.) [* See p. 244,
NOTES ON THE ACCIDENCE. 45
p. 170) brings up a universal law of Hellenistic phonology, viz. the coalescence of two successive ὁ sounds: the inf. διασεῖν for -σείειν (LPg—i/B.c.) will serve as a good example—cf ἀνασῖ in Lk 235s! Ταμεῖον, πεῖν and ὑγεία are overwhelm- ingly attested by the papyri, where there are only rare exx. of the curious reversion seen in Mt 207. In ἁλεεῖς (Mk 1” al) we have dissimilation instead of contraction. Under the head of Elision (p. 146), it may be worth while to mention that the neglect of this even in a verse citation, as in the MSS at 1 Co 15%, is in accord with an exceedingly common practice in inscriptions. The presence or absence of movable v (pp. 146 f.) cannot be reduced to any visible rule: the evanescence of the nasal in pronunciation makes this natural. Cf p. 49 below. Among the spellings recorded on p. 148 we note odupis, γένημα (vegetable product), and «χύννω * as well attested in the papyri; while the wavering of usage between pp and po is traceable down through Hellen- istic to MGr.® The case of the spelling ἀραβών (“only Western”) is instructive. Deissmann (BS 183) gives but one ex. of the pp form, and nine of the single consonant, from three documents. His natural questioning of Hort’s orthography is curiously discounted by the more recently published papyri, which make the totals 11 for the “ Western ” and 15 for pp.* The word will serve as a reminder that only the unanimity of the papyri can make us really sure of our autographs’ spelling: cf Deissmann, BS 181. The wavering of inscriptional testimony as to Zuvpva (tb. 185) makes it impossible to be decisive; but the coincidence of Smyrneean coins makes it seem difficult to reject the witness of δὲ, on suspicion of “ Western” taint. In words with oo the papyri show the Attic rr in about the same small proportion as the NT uncials, and with much the same absence of intelligible principle. ὋὍρνιξ (Lk 13% 8D, also banned as “Western ”) has some papyrus warrant, and survives in the MGr (Cappadocian) opviy: cf Thumb, Hellen. 90. It started in Doric Greek. Coming to the note on τέσσαρες and τεσσα-
1 Correct Ti in loc. I owe the ref. to Buresch RAM xlvi. 213 n. 2 So MGr (Cyprus), says Thumb in TALZ xxviii. 423. 5 Thumb J.c. 422. 4 CR xv. 38, since supplemented.
46 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
ράκοντα (p. 150), we meet our first dissonance between NT uncials and papyri. The e forms are in the latter relatively few, and distinctly illiterate, in the first centuries A.D. Indeed the evidence for τέσσερα or τέσσερας is virtually nil before the Byzantine age, and there does not seem to be the smallest probability that the Apostles wrote anything but the Attic form. For τεσσεράκοντα the case is a little better, but it is hopelessly outnumbered by the -ap- form in docu- ments antedating the NT uncials; the modern σεράντα, side by side with σαράντα, shows that the strife continued. No doubt before iv/a.p. τέσσερες -a (not τεσσέρων) had begun to establish themselves’ in the place they hold to-day. ᾿Εραυνάω is certain from i/a.D. onward;* and Deissmann (BS 182) gives a iv/a.D. papyrus parallel for éyyapevm (x bis, B semel). Spellings like κρίμα (p. 150) are supported by a great multi- plication in Κοινή documents of -wa nouns with shortened penultimate. Cf Moeris (p. 28), ἀνάθημα ᾿Αττικῶς, ἀνάθεμα Ἑλληνικῶς; and note ἀφεύρεμα bis in Par P 62 (ii/B.c.). Even σύστεμα is found (not Ἐσύσταμα), Gen 119, which shows how late and mechanical this process was. The convenient differentiation of meaning between ἀνάθημα and ἀνάθεμα ὃ preserved the former intact, though NADX are quotable for the levelling in its one NT occurrence. The complete estab- lishment of εἶ μήν by the papyri is an interesting confirmation of the best uncials. Despite Hort (p. 151), we must make the difference between εἶ μήν and 4 μήν “strictly orthograph- ical” after all, if the alternative is to suppose any connexion with εἰ, if. Numerous early citations make this last assump- tion impossible* On es and e (p. 153) the papyri are
1 πέσσαρες acc. is another matter: see above, Ὁ. 36.
2 Whether it was general in the Κοινή is doubtful. MGr has ἔρευνα : cf also Par P 60? (ii/B.o. ?), Tb P 88 (7d.). See Buresch, RAM xlvi. 218f.; but note also Thumb, Hellen. 176 f., who disposes of the notion that it was an Alexandrinism. Kretschmer, DZZ, 1901, p. 1049, brings parallels from Thera (αὐ- in compounds of εὖ). See papyrus citations in CR xv, 34, xviii. 107.
ὃ Deissmann has recently shown that ἀνάθεμα, curse, is not an innovation of ‘* Biblical Greek ” (ZN TZ W ii. 842). .
41 have 8 exx. from papyri between 11{8.0. and i/A.D. Still more decisive is the syntax of ef μάν in a well-known Messenian inscription, dated 91 8.6. (Michel 694): ὀρκιζόντω τὸν γυναικονόμον" ef μὰν ἕξειν ἐπιμέλειαν, κτλ, (The same inscription has the form εἶτεν for εἶτα, found in Mk 4%.)

NOTES ON THE ACCIDENCE. 47
entirely indecisive: es even for ¢% is an everyday occurrence. At any rate they give no encouragement to our introducing γείνομαι and γεινώσκω, as WH would like to do: to judge from mere impressions, γίνομαι is at least as common as γείνομαι. This matter of the notorious equivalence of εἰ and « is adduced by Thumb (reviewing Blass*, 7ALZ, 1903, 421) as a specimen of philological facts which are not always present to the minds of theological text-critics: he cites Brooke and M‘Lean (J7S, 1902, 601 ff.), who seriously treat idev, ἴδον, as various readings deserving a place in the LXX text. Ti did the same in Rev, where even WH (see App 162) marked ἴδον, etc., as alternative. In this matter no reader of the papyri would care to set much store by some of the minutize which WH so conscientiously gather from the great uncials. It would probably be safer in general to spell according to tradition ; for even WH admit that their para- mount witness, B, “has little authority on behalf of εἰ as against u.” Finally might be mentioned a notable matter of pronunciation to which Hort does not refer. The less educated papyrus writers very frequently use ἃ for av, before consonants, from i/B.c. onwards.' Its frequent appearance in Attic inscriptions after 74 8,0. is noted by Meisterhans® 154. In Lk 21 (Ayovorov) this pronunciation shows itself, according to NC*4; but we do not seem to find ards, ἑατόν, etc., in the MSS, as we should have expected.2_ An excellent suggestion is made by Dr J. B. Mayor (£apos. vi. x. 289)— following up one of Hort’s—that ἀκαταπάστους in 2 Pet 214 AB may be thus explained: he compares ἀχμηρῷ 1” A. In arguing his case, he fails to see that the dropping of a v (or rather F) between vowels is altogether another thing; but his remaining exx. (to which add those cited from papyri in CR xv. 33, 434, xviii. 107) are enough to prove his point. Laurent remarks (BCH, 1903, p. 356) that this phenomenon was common in the latter half of i/B.c. We need not assume its existence in the NT autographs.
1The same tendency appeared in late vulgar Latin, and perpetuated itself in Romance: see Lindsay, Latin Language 41 f.
2In MGr (see Thumb, Handbuch, p. 59) we find αὐτός (pronounced a/ftés) side by side with ἀτός (obsolete except in Pontus), whence the short form τό, etc. There was therefore a grammatical difference in the Kow# itself.
48 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
We pass on to the noun flexion (p. 156), Nouns in -pa and participles in -via in the papyri regularly form genitive and dative in -ns -n, except that -υίας, -véa are still found in the Ptolemaic - period. Here again the oldest uncials alone—and even they are not without lapses—support the unmistakable verdict of the contemporary documents of the Kow7. We saw reason (above, p. 38) to regard this as the analogical assimilation of © -pé nouns (and—somewhat later and less markedly—via participles) to the other -a flexions of the first declension, rather than as an Ionic survival. We may add that as μώχαιρα produced payaipns on the model of δόξα δόξης, so, by a reverse analogy process, the gen. Νύμφης as a proper name produced what may be read as Νύμφᾶ Νύμφᾶν in nom. and 800. : the best reading of Col 4% (αὐτῆς B) may thus stand, without postulating a Doric Nvpdav, the improbability of which decides Lightfoot for the alternative The heteroclite proper names, which fluctuate between 1st and 3rd decl., are paralleled by Egyptian place-names in papyri. Critics, like Clemen, whose keen scent has differentiated documents by the evidence of Avotpay and Avotpors in Ac 1468 (see Knowling, EGT in loc.), might be invited to track down the “ redactor ” who presumably perpetrated either Κερκεσούχῃ or Kepye- σούχων in GH 46 (ii/ap.). Ramsay (Paul 129) shows that Mupa had acc. -αν and gen. -wv. Uncritical people may perhaps feel encouraged thus to believe that Mt 2! and Mt 23, despite the heteroclisis, are from the same hand.* The variations between 1st and 2nd decl. in words like éxarovrap- xos (-ns) are found passim in papyri: for conscientious labour wasted thereon see Schmiedel’s amusing note in his Preface to WS. In contracted nouns and adjectives we have abundant parallels for forms like ὀστέων, χρυσέων, and for χρυσᾶν (formed by analogy of ἀργυρᾶν). The good attesta- - tion of the type νοός vol, after the analogy of βοῦς, may be observed in passing. The fact that we do not find short forms of nouns in -tos -ἰον (eg. κύρις, masdiv)’ is a
Inflexion :— Nouns.
1 See the writer’s paper in Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. Oct. 1898, p. 12, where the archaic vocative in -ἃ is suggested as the connecting link. Cf Aofde as a proper name (Dieterich, Unters. 172), and Εἰρῆνα in a Christian inscr. (Ramsay, C. & 8. ii. 497 n.). [5 Ὁ 366 p, 244.
i
NOTES ON THE ACCIDENCE. 49
noteworthy test of the educational standard of the writers, for the papyri show them even as early as iii/B.c., and always
_in company with other indications of comparative illiteracy.
These forms, the origin of which seems to me as perplexed as ever, despite the various efforts of such scholars as Thumb, Hatzidakis, and Brugmann to unravel it, ultimately won a monopoly, as MGr shows everywhere. We must not omit mention of the “Mixed Declension,” which arose from analogies in the -a- and -o- nouns, and spread rapidly because of its convenience, especially for foreign names. The stem ends in a long vowel or diphthong, which receives -s for nom. and -ν for acc., remaining unchanged in voc., gen. and dat. sing. ᾿Ιησοῦς is the most conspicuous of many NT exx. It plays a large part in MGr.! Passing lightly over the exact correspondence between uncials and papyri in the accusatives of κλείς and χάρις (p. 157), we may pause on χεῖραν in Jn 20% x*AB. The great frequency of this formation in uneducated papyri, which adequately foreshadows its victory in MGr? naturally produced sporadic examples in our MSS, but it is not at all likely that the autographs showed it (unless possibly in Rev). Gregory (in Ti, vol. iii, 118 f.) registers forms like ἀσφαλῆν and ποδήρην, which also have papyrus parallels, but could be explained more easily from the analogy of 1st decl. nouns. ΜΜείξων acc. (Jn 5% ABEGMAZ) is a good example of the irrational addition of v, which seems to have been added after long vowels almost as freely as the equally unpronounced 4.2 One further noun calls for comment, viz., ᾿Ελαιῶνος in Ac 1:3 (p. 158). The noun ἐλαιών = olivetum occurs nearly thirty times in papyri between i/ and iii/a.p., which prompts” surprise at Blass’s continued scepticism. “Ἑλικών (salicetum) is an ancient example of the turning of a similar word into a proper name.‘

1 See CR xviii. 109, Kithner-Blass § 136.
3 It seems most probable that the modern levelling of 1st and 8rd decl. started with this accusative. See Thumb, Handbuch 28, 35; also p. 18 for the pronunciation of -ν final.
ὃ Thus dw: is acc. sing., while ἣν (=7) is sometimes subjunctive. For vxx. seo CR xviii. 108. So ὅσα ἐὰν ἣν in Gen 6!" Εἰ.
4See Deissmann, BS 208 ff., and the addenda in Hepos. vi. vii. 111, viii. 429; also below, pp. 69 and 235. See also p. 244.
4
See:
σ0 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
Two curious indeclinables meet us period- Indeclinable . ΜΝ Adjectives. ically among the adjectives. Πλήρης should be read in Mk 4% (C*, Hort) and Ac 6° (xAC*DEHP al.), and is probably to be recognised in Jn 115, Οἱ 2 Jn® (L), Mk 8” (AFGM al.), Ac 6? (AEHP al.) 19% (AEL 13). Thus in every NT occurrence of an oblique case of this word we meet with the indeclinable form in good uncials. The papyrus citations for this! scarcely begin, how- ever, before ii/A.D. ; and we cannot well credit educated writers with such a form. We may probably assume that in Jn 115 an original πλήρη was corrupted to the vulgar πλήρης in an early copy. 3B. Weiss and others would make the adj. depend in sense upon αὐτοῦ, but δόξαν seems more appropriate, from the whole trend of the sentence: it is the “glory” or “self-revelation” of the Word that is “full of grace and truth.” One might fairly doubt whether expositors would have thought of making καὶ ἐθεασάμεθα... πατρός a parenthesis, had it not been for the supposed necessity of construing πλήρης as a nominative. We may regard D as having either preserved or successfully restored the original reading here.?. The other indeclinables in question are πλείω and the other forms in -w from the old comparative base in -yos. Cronert (in Philologus lxi. 161 ff.) has shown how frequently in papyri and even in literature these forms are used, like πλήρης and ἥμισυ, without modification for case. In Mt 265° we have a good example preserved in xBD, the later MSS duly mending the grammar with πλείους. Is it possible that the false reading in Jn 10” started from an original μείζω of this kind ? Many more noun forms might be cited in which the MSS prove to have retained the genuine Hellenistic, as evi- denced by the papyri; but these typical examples will serve.
1 CR xv. 35, 435, xviii. 109. See also C. H. Turner in J7S i. 120 ff. and 561 f. ; Radermacher in RAM lvii. 151; Reinhold 58. LPc (ii/B.c.) is the only ex. I know, earlier than ii/A.p. It may very well be original in Mk.
2 Winer, p. 705, compares the ‘‘ grammatically independent” πλήρης clause with the nom. seen in Phil 3, Mk 12®,. W. F. Moulton makes no remark there, but in the note on Jn 114 (Milligan-Moulton zn Joc.) he accepts the construction found in the RV, or permits his colleagne to do so. At that date the case for the indeclinable πλήρης was before him only in the LXX (as Job 213 ΒΑΘ). See also p, 244.
NOTES ON THE ACCIDENCE. 51
Verbs naturally supply yet more abundant material, but we need not cite it fully here. Pursuing the order of WH App, Verbs: We pause a moment on the dropped augments, etc., in pp. 161 ἢ, which are well illustrated in papyri. This phenomenon goes back to Herodotus, and may well be a contribution of Ionic to the Common Greek. Diphthongs are naturally the first to show the tendency: it is not likely, for example, that Drs Grenfell and Hunt would now, as in the editio princeps of the Oxyrhynchus Logia (1897, p. 7), call οἰκοδομημένη a “more serious error” than az for e or εἰ for +. The double augment of ἀπεκατεστάθη in papyri and NT may be noted as a suggestive trifle under this head of augments before we pass on. Very satisfactory confirmation of our
Person- . wpe ᾿ endings. uncial tradition is supplied by the person- endings. The functionally useless difference of ending between the strong and the weak aorist began to disappear in our period. The strong aorist act. or mid. is only found in some thirty -w verbs (and their compounds) in the NT; and while the great frequency of their occurrence protected the root-form, the overwhelming predominance of the sigmatic aorist tended to drive off the field its rival’s person-endings. The limits of this usage in the NT text are entirely in accord with the better-written papyn. Thus we find little encouragement for yevapevos, for which any number of papyrus citations may be made. But when we notice yeva [. . .] in BU 1033 (ii/a.p.) corrected to yevo ... by a second hand,” we see that education still rebelled against this develop- ment, which had begun with the Attic εἶπας centuries before. The tendency, in fairly cultured speech, mainly concerned the act., and the indic. middle. For the details see the careful note in WS p. 111. Whether the same intrusion should
Augments.
1 So Lk 22% x, Lk 243 B, and Mk 6* and 15“ A: there is no further uncial support, if Ti is reliable, throughout Mt, Mk, and Lk, in a total of 40 occur- rences. The ptc. does not occur in Jn. I have not looked further.
2 Kvpduevos in Heb 9"? (all uncials except D,) is perhaps due to the frequency of 1st aor. in -pa. The ptc. itself appears in an inscr. of the Roman age, IMA iii. 1119. P. Buttmamn cites γενάμενος from Archimedes (iii/B.0.), though Wilamowitz-Mollendorf in his extracts from the Psammites (Lesebuch 248 ff.) edits γενόμενος seven times. But in a Doric author the question concerns us little. MGr shows that yevduevos came to stay.
52 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
be allowed in the imperf., eg. εἶχαν Mk 8’, is doubtful, in view of the scanty warrant from the papyri. It is for the Same reason more than doubtful whether we can accept παρελάβοσαν 2 Th 3° x*AD*: I have only 4 imperf. and 2 aor. exx. from Ptolemaic times, and the forms ἐλαμβά- νεσαν and ἀφίλεσαν (BM 18, 41, 161 Bc.—cited by WM 91 n°) show that the innovation had not attained great fixity before i/ap. The ocular confusion suggested by Hort in 2 Th lc. would be furthered by the later currency of this convenient ending. What we find it hard to allow in a writer of Paul’s culture is a little easier in Jn (15% 39 NBL etc.); and ἐδολεοῦσαν Rom 3% (LXX) might have been. written by Paul himself, apart from quotation—we can hardly cite any other 3 pl. imperf. from -ow verbs. As early as ii/B.c. we find ἠξιοῦσαν in Magn. 47: see Nach- manson’s parallels, pp. 148 f. The -es of 2 sg. perf., read by WH in Rev 28:6 11", and in Ist aor. Rev 246, may perhaps be allowed in Rev as a mark of imperfect Greek: it has no warrant from educated writing outside. The 3 pl. perf. in -αν is well attested in Ac 16% and Ro 16’ xAB, Lk 986 BLX, Col 21 x*ABCD*P, as well as in Jn, Jas and Rev, where it raises less difficulty. It certainly makes a fair show in the papyri, even as early as the Ptolemaic period, but not in documents which would encourage us to receive it for Luke or Paul. As the only difference between perf. and 1 aor.-endings, the -aot was foredoomed to yield to the assimilating tendency; but possible occurrences of -αν are relatively so few, and the witness of the papyri so dubious, that it is safer, except in Rev, to suppose it a vulgarism due to the occasional lapse of an early scribe? If it were really Alexandrian, as Sextus Empiricus says, we could understand its comparative frequency in the papyri; but Thumb decisively rejects this (Hellenismus 170), on the ground of its frequent appearance elsewhere? The termina-
1 Even B shows it, in Ac 213,
2 Téyovay formed the starting-point of a valuable paper by K. Buresch in RhM, 1891, pp. 198 ff., which should not be missed by the student of Hellenistic, though it needs some modification in the light of newer knowledge, Thus he accepts the Alexandrian provenance of this and the -ocay type.
3 At Delphi, for example, with imperf. and aor. -οσαν (see Ὁ. 37).
NOTES ON THE ACCIDENCE. 53
tion -aos invades what is formally, though not in meaning, a present, in the case of ἥκασι, which is a genuine vernacular form (cf ἥκαμεν in Par P 48 (ii/B.c.)). WH (App 169) reject it as “Western” in Mk 88, regarding it as a paraphrase of εἰσίν (BLA); but it must be observed that the Lewis Syriac is now to be added to xADN, with the Latin and other versions, which support it. It is after all a form which we might expect in Mk, and equally expect to find removed by revisers, whether Alexandrian or Syrian. By way of completing the person-endings, we may observe that the pluperf. act. has exclusively the later -e» form, with -e- even in 3 pl.;1 and that the 3 pl. imper. in -τωσαν and «σθωσαν are unchallenged.
Taking up the contract verbs, we note how the confusions between -dw and -éw forms (p. 166) are supported by our external evidence, and by MGr. Our first serious revolt from WH concerns the infinitive in -ofv (and by analogy -dv). The evidence for it is “small, but of good quality” (p. 166—cf Introd. § 410): it is in fact confined to B*D in Mt 132, ΒΞ in Mk 4%, x* in 1 Pet 2, BD* in Heb 75 (where see Ti), and a lectionary in Lk 9*. This evidence may pass if our object is merely to reproduce the spelling of the age of B; but absolutely no corroboration seems discoverable, earlier than the date of B itself, except an inscription cited in Hatzidakis (p. 193), and a newly published papyrus, also from ii/a.D., PFi 24. Blass (p. 48) does not regard the form as established for the NT. We can quote against it from i-iv/a.D. a dozen examples of -οὖν in papyri. (That -ody and -ay (not av) are the correct Attic forms, may be seen from Meisterhans® 175 f£, which Hort’s hesitation as to -ἂν prompts me to quote: for the reason of the apparent irregularity see Brugmann, Gr. Gramm? 61, or WS 42.) Next may be named, for -ἄω verbs, the 2nd sing. pres. mid. in -ὦσαι (καυχᾶσαι, ὀδυνᾶσαι), which has been formed afresh in the Kowvy with the help of the -caz that answers to 3rd
1 There are isolated exceptions in the papyri.
2 So WS 116 n. Two other inscriptions are cited by Hatzidakis, but without dates. Vitelli (on PFi 2.0.) refers to Crénert 220 n., who corrects Schmiedel’s philology: the form is of course a simple product of analogy— λύεε : λύειν : : δηλοῖ : Sndoiv,
δ4 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
ging. -7at in the perfect. It is well paralleled by the early Ptolemaic future χαριεῖσαι, for which χαρίεσαι appears in OP 292 (i/aD.). Φάγεσαι and πίεσαι, which naturally went together, give us the only exx. outside -dw verbs, to which the quotations in G. Meyer Gr. Gram? 549 suggest that the innovation was mainly confined. The later extensions may be noted in Hatzidakis 188. Note the converse change in δύνη. Unfortunately we do not seem to have exx. of the subj. of -ow verbs, to help the parsing of ἕνα ξηλοῦτε and the like (p. 167). Blass (Kiihner® i, 2. 587, and Gr. 48) accepts Hort’s view that the subj. of these verbs became identical with the indic., just as it always was in the -ἄάω verbs. (See W. F. Moulton’s note, WM 363. Ex 116 ὅταν μαιοῦσθε.. . . καὶ ὦσι, there cited, is a very good example.) But Blass rightly, I think, rejects the supposition that evodarat (1 Co 167) can be anything but a pres. subj. To read evodwrai, as pert. indic., is possible, though the editors do not seem by their printing to have favoured that alternative. That it is a perf. subj. is extremely unlikely. The parallels on which Hort (p. 172) relies—set forth with important additions in Blass’s Kiihner i. 2. 100 f£—do nothing to make it likely that the Kown had any perf. subj. apart from the ordinary periphrastic form. It is hard, moreover, to see why the pres. subj. is not satisfactory here: see Dr Findlay’s note in loc. (EGT vol. it). Finally we note the disappearance of the -ἤω verbs from the Κοινή, with the exception of {jw and χρήομαι ὃ (as we ought to call them); also the sporadic appearance of the uncontracted ἐδέετο Lk 888 (B and a few others -εἶτο, which looks like a correction). It is supported by Esth 14° A, BU 926 (ii/a.p.) and the Mithras Liturgy (p. 12): it is probably, as Blass suggests, a mere analogy-product from δέομαι conjugated
1To suppose this (or φάγεσαι, similarly formed from φάγεται) a genuine survival of the pre-Greek -esai, is characteristic of the antediluvian philology which still frequently does duty for science in this country. Krumbacher, KZ xxvii. 497, scoffs at Εἰ. Curtius for talking of an ‘‘uralte” «σαι.
2To argue this would demand a very technical discussion. It is enough to say that the Attic κεκτῶμαι and μεμνῶμαι are not derivative verbs, and that the three derivative verbs which can be quoted, from Doric, Cretan and Ionic respectively, supply slender justification for the supposed Κοινή parallel.
3 Χρᾶσθαι was the Hellenistic infin., but there is no example of it in NT.

NOTES ON THE ACCIDENCE. 55
like λύομαιϊ and owes nothing to Ionic. It affords no warrant for suspecting uncontracted forms elsewhere : κατέχεεν Mk 14? is an aor., as in Attic.
The verbs in -ye continued in Hellenistic to suffer from the process of gradual extinction which began even in Homeric Greek, and in MGr has eliminated every form outside the verb “be.” The papyri agree with the NT uncials in showing forms like δύνομαι and -éSero (as well as -é507T0), and various flexions after contract verb types. New verbs like ἱστάνω 3 are formed, and new tenses like éordxa (transitive). The most important novelty apart from these is the aor. subj. dot and yvo?,2 as to which W. F. Moulton’s view (WM 360 n.) is finally established by good attestation from papyri. The pres. subj. διδοῖ, after the -ow verbs, set the analogy at work. That in much later documents such forms may be opt. need not trouble us. The form δῴῃ is more difficult. Schwyzer (p. 191) quotes Moeris for ποιῴη in Common Greek, and calls in the analogy of τιμῴη : the further step to δῴη (also attested by Moeris) was eased by the fact that δοίη drew towards diz, and would consequently become monosyllabic: see p. 45. Mwy (subj.) seems a syntact- ical necessity in Eph 1” (B δῷ), 2 Tim 2” (ef later uncials in Eph 316 and Jn 151°): this form, well known in Homer, survives in Beotian and Delphian inscriptions, as Michel 1411 (ii/B.c., Delphi), 1409 (do)* It is quite intel- ligible that NW Greek (cf above, p. 36 ἢ) should have thus contributed to the Kown an item which (like other contributions from a single quarter, ¢g. τέσσαρες acc.) kept only a precarious existence by the side of other forms. We return to this later (pp. 193 f.). From oféa we have in papyri, as in NT, ordinary perfect indic. flexion,® and pluperf. for ἤδειν, with occasional literary revival of the older irregular forms. Finally, in the conjugation of εἰμί, the middle forms
Verbs in -μι.
1 See below, p. 234.
* The form -ordyw in καὶ and D (p. 168) is interesting in that it exactly anticipates the MGr. So NP 53 (iii/a.p.), in Wilcken’s reading.
8. So in 2nd person also, ἀποδοῖς Lk 1229 Ὁ (as papyri).
4 See G. Meyer Gr. Gramm.* 656.
δ᾽ Probably Ionic: so Herodotus, and even our texts of Homer (Od. i. 337).
56 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
are well established (ἤμην, 7ueP8a—see above, p. 37), as to a still further extent in MGr. Even the MGr present εἶμαι is found already in a Phrygian inscription ap. Ramsay C. and 8. ii. 565 (early iv/a.p.). G. Meyer (Gr. Gramm3 569) regarded ἔσται as the 3rd sing. of this, transferred to future meaning; but this view seems questionable. It may be noted that the old 1st sing. ἦν reappears in D at Ac 20%: elsewhere ἤμην stands alone. The rarer ἤτω alternates with ἔστω, in papyri and late inscriptions, as in NT. Mi It is needless to add any details as to iscellaneous. aor noteworthy forms among the “ principal parts” of verbs. Papyrus parallels may be cited for ἠνούγην, for the double formation of ἁρπάξω and βαστάζξω (ἡρπάγην and ἡρπάσθην, ἐβάστασα and ἐβάσταξα 1), for the alternative perf. of τυγχάνω (see Ti on Heb 8°), for the 1 aor. of ἄγω, etc. Note especially the intrusion of the w from the present of λαμβάνω into various parts of the verb, and into derivative nouns (p. 142), This is normal in the papyri after the Ptolemaic period, in which there is still some lingering of the older forms. The same phenomenon occurred partially in Ionic; but the Ionic fut. λάμψομαι, by taking over the ἃ as well as the nasal of the present, shows that it was an independent development in the Kow. This will serve as a final example to show that the late uncials and cursives, in restoring classical forms which the best MSS set aside, were deserting the Greek of the NT period in the interests of an artificial grammar.
1 So P 1 38 in Rev 2%. It is ΜΟῚ, and may quite probably be read in Rev: cf δυσβάστακτος Lk 11%,

CHAPTER IV. Syntax: THE NOUN.
WE address ourselves to the syntax, beginning with that of the Noun. There are grammatical categories here that scarcely ask for more than bare mention. On the subject of Number there is one obvious thing to say—the dual has gone. Many Greek dialects, Ionic conspicuously, had discarded this hoary luxury
long before the Common Greek was born;
The Dual.
Neuter Plurals, 224 no theory of the relation of the Kou} to
the dialects would allow Attic to force on the resultant speech a set of forms so useless as these. The dual may well have arisen in prehistoric days when men could not count beyond two; and it is evidently suffering from senile decay in the very earliest monuments we possess of Indo-Germanic language. It had somewhat revived in Attic— witness the inscriptions, and folk-songs like the “ Harmodius ” ; but it never invaded Hellenistic, not even when a Hebrew dual might have been exactly rendered by its aid. We shall see when we come to the adjectives that the disappearance of the distinction between duality and plurality had wider results than the mere banishment of the dual number from declensions and conjugations. The significant new flexion of δύο should be noted here: there is a pluralised dative δυσί, but in other respects δύο is indeclinable. “Apdo has dis- appeared in favour of the normally declined ἀμφότερος. Apart from this matter the only noteworthy point under Number is the marked weakening of the old principle that neuter plurals (in their origin identical with collectives in -a1) took a singular verb. In the NT we have a large
Number :—
1See Giles, Manual?, 264 ff. (I might add here that Mr Giles thinks the
dual may have been originally a specialised form of the plural, used (as in
Homer always) to describe natural or artificial pairs. That this is its earliest 57
58 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
extension of what in classical Greek was a comparatively rare licence, the plural verb being allowed when the individual items in the subject are separately in view, while the singular treats the subject as a collective unity. The liberty of using the plural freely makes the use of the singular distinctly more significant than it could be in classical Greek.  Pindaric” It may be added that the converse Construction, Phenomenon, known as the σχῆμα Πινδα- ρικόν, is found in the NT: see Mk 44, Mt δ:8 619. 1 Co 15, Rev 91% It is really only a special case of - anacoluthon, no more peculiar to Pindar than to Shakspere. An interesting communication by Prof. Skeat to the Cam- bridge Philological Society (Proceedings, lxvii. p. 2) describes a rule in English, from Alfred downwards, that “when a verb occurs in the 3rd person in an introductory manner .. ., it is often used in the singular number, though the subject may be in the plural.” Thus “what cares these roarers for the name of king ?”—“and now abideth faith, hope, [love], these three,”—etc.; the last being as true to English idiom as to its original Greek. That the construction is also pos- sible with order inverted, is shown by another citation, “ For thy three thousand ducats here 18 six.” (See also p. 234.) Impersonal An idiomatic use of the plural appears Plural. in passages like Mt 22 τεθνήκασιν, Lk 12?° αἰτοῦσιν, where there is such ἃ suppression of the subject in bringing emphasis on the action, that we get the effect of a passive, or of French on, German man. Our “they say” is like it. Lightfoot compares the “rhetorical plural” in Euripides JZ’ 1359, κλέπτοντες ἐκ γῆς ξόανα καὶ θνηπόλους (4.e. Iphigenia). Add Livy ix. 1, “auctores belli [one man] dedidimus.” Winer gives other parallels, but rightly refuses to put Mt 98 27“, 1 Co 15% 16° into this category. If Heb 101 has not a primitive error (as Hort suspected), the plural subject of προσφέρουσιν
extant use is certain, but its origin may very well have been as suggested above. There are savages still who cannot count beyond two: see Tylor, Primitive Culture, i. 242f. The Indo-Germans had numerals up to 100 before their separation ; but the superfluous dual, I suggest, had been already utilised for a new purpose.
1 This is conspicuous in D (Wellh. 12).
SYNTAX: THE NOUN. 59
and δύνανται might fairly be described in this way; for the priests are certainly not prominent in the writer’s thought, and a passive construction would have given the meaning exactly. So Westcott (for mpood.) who quotes Jn 15% 203, Rev 12°, Mt 7%, Mk 1038, Lk 17%. See also p. 168, n2 On Gender likewise there is not much to say. There are sundry differences in the gender of particular words; but even MGr is nearly as much under the domination of this outworn excrescence on language as was its classical ancestor. That English should still be almost the only European language to discard gender, indicating only distinction of sex, is exceedingly strange. As in the case of Number, we have to refer to ordinary grammars for some uses of gender which NT Greek shares with the classical. One or two cases of slavish translation should be mentioned. In Rom 11* the LXX τῷ Baad is cited as τῇ B., which occurs however three times in LXX, and in Ascensio Isaiae 12. Prof. F. C. Burkitt (CR xiv. 458), in commenting on this last passage, accepts the explanation that the gender is deter- mined by the Q’rt nwa, translated αἰσχύνη. In Mk 121 and Mt 2142 we have the LXX αὕτη =nw}: the translators may perhaps have interpreted their own Greek by recalling κεφαλὴν γωνίας. Breach of concord in Gender has been already alluded to in a note on the Greek of Rev (p. 9). The very difficult εἴ tis σπλάγχνα καὶ οἰκτιρμοί of Phil 2! comes in here, involving as it does both number and gender. We might quote in illus- tration Par P15 (ii/B.c.) ἐπί τι μίαν τῶν... οἰκιῶν, and BU 326 (ii/a.D.) εἰ δέ τι περισσὰ γράμματα... καταλίπω." But Blass’s εἴ τι, read throughout, is a great improvement: si quid valet is the sense required, as Lightfoot practically shows by his translation. H. A. A. Kennedy (ZG@T in loc.) makes independently the same suggestion. Note that the Codex Amiatinus (and others) read δὲ guid viscera. [>See p. 244. A significant remark may be quoted from the great Byzantinist, K. Krumbacher, ἃ propos of these breaches of concord. In his Problem d. neugr. Schriftsprache (p. 50) he observes: “If one finds in Greek literature, between the early Byzantine age and the present day, mistakes like λεαινῶν μὴ συγχωρούντων, φυλαὶ καταλαβόντες, πάντων τῶν γυναικῶν,
Gender :—
Breach of Concord.
60 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK
etc., it shows that we have to do with a half-dead form, in which mistakes slip in as soon as grammatical vigilance nods.” When we remember that the MGr present participle, eg. dévovras, is as indeclinable as our own equivalent “binding,” we can see some reason for the frequency of non-agreement in this part of the verb. What became common in the early Byzantine literature would ‘naturally be incipient in the vernacular of imperfectly educated persons centuries before, like the author of βου A few nouns wavering in gender
may be named, Amos is masculine in Par P 22 (ii/B.c.) and feminine in 26, which is written by the same hand; further.
parallels need not be sought for the inconsistency between Lk 4% and Ac 11%, Lk 15%, The apparently purposeless variation between ἡ θεός and ἡ θεά in Ac 19 is explained by inscriptions.? Some masculine -os nouns like ἔλεος, ἦχος, πλοῦτος, passed into the neuter declension in Hellenistic, and remain there in MGr: see Hatzidakis, pp. 356 ff. Case :— We are free now to examine the pheno- Disappearance mena of Case. To estimate the position of of the Hellenistic cases along the line of develop- Local Cases. ment, we may sum up briefly what may be seen at the two ends of this line. MGr has only the three cases we ourselves possess—nominative, accusative, and genitive. (The survival of a few vocative forms, in which MGr and Hellenistic are on practically the same footing, does not affect this point, for the vocative is not really a case.) At the very dawn of Greek language history, as we know it, there is only one more, the dative, though we can detect a few moribund traces of instrumental, locative, and ablative. For
all practical purposes, we may say that Greek lost in pre-
1 Of Reinhold 57 f., and p. 234 below. We may cite typical breaches of con- cord from the papyri. Firstly, case :—KP 37 (ii/a.D.) ρων ἔγραψα ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ μὴ εἰδὼς γρ(άμματαλ :—this is quite true as it stands, but Heron meant εἰδότος ! So BU 81 (eidés!). BU 1002 (i/B.0.) ᾿Αντιφίλου “Ἕλλην. . . ἱππάρχης. Letr. 149 (ii/A.D.) τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ . . . ὁ διάτοχος (Ξε διαδ.), OP 527 (ii-iii/a.p.) περὶ Lephvov τοῦ γναφέως ὁ cuvepyatéuevos.* Then gender:—BU 997 (ii/B.c.) τὴν ὑπάρχον αὐτῶι οἰκίαν. Ib. 577 (iii/A.D.) ἐκ τῆς μετηλλαχότος γυναῖκαν. Ib. 1018 (i/A.D.) ἡ ὁμολογῶν. Jb, 1086 (ii/A.D.) στολὴν λειγνοῦν. LPw (ii/B.c.) τὴν τῶν θεῶν ἄνασσον ἀκούσαντα. AP 118 (ii/A.D.) ὁ τετελευτηκὼς αὐτῆς μήτηρ.
. 2Cf Blass on 1977: “ὁ Usitate dicitur ἡ θεός (ut ν.57) ; verum etiam inscriptio Ephesia . . . τῇ μεγίστῃ θεᾷ ᾿Εφεσίᾳ᾽ Ἀρτέμιδι, cum alibi. . . ἡ θεός eadem dicatur. ... Itaque formulam sollemnem 7 μεγάλη θεὰ "Α. mira diligentia L. conservavit.” #
α ὃ See p. 244.
SYNTAX: THE NOUN. 61
historic times three out of the primitive seven cases (or eight, if we include the vocative), viz., the from case (ablative), the with case (instrumental +), and the at or im case (locative), all of which survived in Sanskrit, and appreciably in Latin, though obscured in the latter by the formal syncretism of ablative, instrumental, and (except in singular of -d- and -o- nouns) locative. In other words, the purely local cases, in which the meaning could be brought out by a place- adverb (for this purpose called a preposition), sacrificed their distinct forms and usages? Greek is accordingly marked, Encroachment sng This. characteristic is most obvious of Prepositions. UO"8 τὴ} erik δ) intensified in Hellenistic, where we are per- petually finding prepositional phrases used to express rela- tions which in classical Greek would have been adequately given by a case alone. It is needless to illustrate this fact, except with one typical example which will fitly introduce the next point to be discussed. We have already (pp. 11 f.) referred to the instrumental ἐν, formerly regarded as a trans- lation of the familiar Hebrew 3, but now well established as vernacular Greek of Ptolemaic and later times. The examples adduced all happen to be from the category “armed with”; but it seems fair to argue that an instrumental sense for ἐν is generally available if the context strongly pleads for it, without regarding this restriction or assuming Hebraism.® Nor is the intrusion of ἐν exclusively a feature of “ Biblical ” Greek, in the places where the prep. seems to be superfluous. Thus in Gal 51 the simple dative appears with ἐνέχομαι: Par P 63 (ii/B.c.—a royal letter) gives us τοὺς ἐνεσχημένους
1The instrumental proper all but coincided with the dative in form throughout the sing. of the Ist and 2nd decl., so that the still surviving dative of instrument may in these declensions be regarded as the ancient case : the comttative ‘‘ with,” however, was always expressed by a preposition, except in the idiom αὐτοῖς ἀνδράσι, and the ‘‘ military dative.’
2 Note that the ἐ0 case also disappeared, the ‘‘ terminal accusative” seen in ire Romam. The surviving Greek cases thus represent purely grammatical relations, those of subject, object, possession, remoter object, and instrument.
81 shouid not wish to exclude the possibility that this ἐν, although correct vernacular Greek, came to be used rather excessively by translators from Hebrew, or by men whose mother tongue was Aramaic. The.use would be explained on the same lines as that of ἰδού on p. 11.
62 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
ἔν τισιν ayvonpacw. In Par P 22 (ii/B.c.) we have τῷ λιμᾷ διαλυθῆναι, while the contemporary 28 has διαλυόμεναι ἐν τῷ λιμῷ. What gave birth to this extension of the uses of év? It seems certainly to imply a growing lack of clearness in the simple dative, resulting in an unwilling- ness to trust it to express the required meaning without further definition. We may see in the multiplied use of pre- positions an incipient symptom of that simplification of cases which culminates in the abbreviated case system of to-day. The NT student may easily overlook the fact that the dative has already entered the way that leads to extinction. I take a page at random from Mk in WH, and count 21 datives against 23 genitives and 25 accusatives. A random page from the Teubner Herodotus gives me only 10, against 23 and 29 respectively; one from Plato 11, against 12 and 25. Such figures could obviously prove nothing con- clusive until they were continued over a large area, but they may be taken as evidence that the dative is not dead yet. Taking the NT as a whole, the dative with prepositions falls behind the accusative and genitive in the proportion 15 to 19 and 17 respectively. This makes the dative considerably more prominent than in classical and post-classical historians.’ The preponderance is, however, due solely to ἐν, the commonest of all the prepositions, outnumbering ets by about three to two: were both these omitted, the dative would come down to 24 in the above proportion, while the accusative would still be 10. And although ἐν has greatly enlarged its sphere of influence? in the NT as compared with literary Kowvy, we
Decay of the Dative :—
Uses with Prepositions.
1 Helbing, in Schanz’s Beitrdge, No. 16 (1904), p. 11, gives a table for the respective frequency of dat., gen., and accus. with prepositions, which works out for Herodotus, Thucydides, and Xenophon, taken together, at 1: 1°2: 3; for twelve post-classical historians, from Polybius to Zosimus, at 1: 1°5: 2°4.
3 This is well seen by comparing the statistics of Helbing, pp. 8f. He gives the figures for the three favourite prepositions of the historians. ᾿Εν is one of the three in every author except Polybius, Diodorus, and Josephus; εἰς falls out of the list in Eusebius only. The total occurrences of els in the three classical historians amount to 6,531, those of ἐν to 6,031; while in the twelve Hellenistic writers els comes to 31,651, and ἐν to only 17,180. Contrast the NT, where els is preferred to ἐν only in Mk and Heb, and the total occurrences amount to 1,748 and 2,698 respectively. See the list in p. 98 below: note there also the
SYNTAX: THE NOUN. 63
find very clear examples of ets encroaching on its domain.* There are many NT passages where a real distinction between εἰς and ἐν is impossible to draw without excessive subtlety, for which all the motive is gone when we find in MGr στό with accusative (= εἰς τόν) the substitute for the now obsolete dative; while the language in its intermediate stages steadily tends towards this ultimate goal! By the side of this we may put the disappearance of ὑπό with the dative, the accusative serving to express both motion and rest: in the classical historians the dative is nearly as frequent as the accusative, and some of their successors, notably Appian and Herodian, made it greatly outnumber its rival—see Helbing, op. cit.. p. 22. Similarly πρός with dative stands in NT in the ratio of less than ‘01 to πρός with accusative: in the three classical historians it averages nearly ‘12 ; in the later twelve, ‘01 again. ‘Evi and παρά are the only prepositions in which the use with three cases is really alive; and even ἐπί rather illustrates our tendency than contradicts it—see Ὁ. 107. Other cases We pass on to other symptoms of sen- substituted, cScence im the dative. In the papyri there are some clear examples of an accusative expressing point of time instead of duration (see CR xviii. 152); andin Ac 206 and Jn 4°, Rev 3° we may recognise the same thing.” Of course the dative of “time when” was still very much more common. There were not wanting, indeed, instances where a classical use of the accusative, such as that of specification (Goodwin Greek Gram. § 1058), has yielded to a dative of reference (instrumental)? We have examples of its survival in Jn 6” al (WM 288 f.); but, as in the papyri, the dative is very much commoner. The evidence of the decay of the dative was examined with great minuteness by F. Krebs in his three pamphlets, Zur Rection der Casus in der spdteren historischen Gracitéit (1887-1890). He deals only
marked drop in the total for ἐπί, which in the twelve writers of literary Κοινή comes not far behind ἐν (14,093).
1 See below, p. 234.
*Thus OP 477 (ii/a.D.) τὸ πέμπτον ἔτος, ‘‘in the fifth year”—a recurrent formula. Add Gen 4816 (Dieterich, Unters. 151). With ὥραν, however, the use began in classical times: see Blass 94. See also p. 245.
Of CR xv. 488, xviii. 153, and the useful Program by Compernass, De Sermone Gr. Volg. Pisidiae Phrygiaeque meridionalis, pp. 20f. [%See p. 245.
64 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
with the literary Κοινή; but we may profitably take up his points in order and show from the NT how these tendencies of the artificial dialect are really derived from the vernacular. Krebs starts with verbs which are beginning to take the accusative, having been confined to the dative in the earlier language. The distinction in meaning between transitive verbs and verbs whose complement was properly instrumental (as with ypaéo0ar—which itself takes an abnormal accus. in 1 Co 781), or the dative of person interested, inevitably faded away with time, and the grammatical distinction became accordingly a useless survival. Of Krebs’ exx., πολεμεῖν takes accus. also in vernacular, ἐνεδρεύειν and εὐδοκεῖν in the NT; but ξενίξεσθαι, ἀπαντᾶν and ὑπαντῶν retain the dative there1 The movement was accompanied with various symptoms of reaction. IIpocxvveity in the NT takes the dative about twice as often as the accusative.2 The phrase παραβάλλεσθαι τῇ ψυχῇ (Polybius) is matched in respect of its innovating dative by παραβολεύεσθαι in Phil 2% We will dismiss the decay of the dative with the remark that the more illiterate papyri and inscriptions decidedly show it before the NT had acquired any antiquity. The schoolboy of OP 119, referred to already (p. 28), uses σέ for σοί after γράφω: while later samples (see CR as above) include such monstrosities as tive λόγου, σὺν τῶν υἱῶν, χαρίζετε éuod.®” Dittenberger would actually recognise the same thing in OGIS 17 ᾿Αθηνᾶι Σωτείρᾳ Νίκῃ καὶ βασιλέως Πτολεμαίου. But at the beginning of iii/B.c. this confusion is surely unthinkable, and there is a curious asyndeton left: should the «ai be transposed?* Even OP 811 (4D. 1), εὐχαριστῶν “Ερμίππου, seems much too early to be intentional. We may follow Krebs further as he shows the encroachments of the accusative upon the genitive, and upon the field of verbs which were formerly intransitive. It will be seen that the
1 Also, we may add, πειθαρχεῖν, which takes a gen. (like ἀκούω) in Tb Ρ 104 (i/B.c.), OP 265 (i/a.p.), and the ‘‘Gadatas” inscr. (Michel 82). For the dat., as in NT, cf Afagn. 114, etc. Evdoxeiy ὁ. acc. is only in a quotation.
2 Contrast the inscriptions: see CR xv. 436. But note Par P 51 (ii/8.0.} ἵνα προσκυνήσῃς αὐτόν.
3 See other exx. in Dieterich, Uniers. 150.
4D.’s further ex., No. 87 (iii/B.c.) ὑπὲρ βασιλέως. . . καὶ βασιλίσσης . . kal Πτολεμαίωι τῶι vide seems merely ἃ mason’s carelessness. [6 See p. 245.
a
SYNTAX : THE NOUN. 65
NT does not tally in details with the literary Κοινή, though it independently shows the same tendencies at work. In his second part Krebs turns to the genitive. The first verb in which we are interested ‘is the late compound ἀπελπίξειν, which gene- rally takes acc. instead of the natural gen. This it seems to do in Lk 6%, if we read μηδένα with δὲ etc. and the Lewis Syriac:1 so Ti WHmg RVmg. Koparetiy (Krebs ii, 14) takes the gen. only 8 times in NT, out of 46 occur- rences, but διαφέρειν (“surpass”) has gen. always. ’Ep- τρἔπεσθαι (p. 15) takes only the acc.,? and so does κληρονομεῖν. Δράσσομαι (p. 17) has the acc. in the only place where it occurs (1 Co 8:9, cited from the LXX). ᾿Επιθυμῶ may be added to this list, if we may follow BD al. in Mt 5%. Add likewise the sporadic exx. of acc. with verbs of filling (Rev 17° αἱ. ; see Blass 102): Thumb observes (7JALZ xxviii. 422) that the usage lives on in MGr.® There follows a category of intransitive verbs which in Hellenistic have begun to take a direct object in the acc. Of these we recognise as NT examples ἐνεργεῖν (six times), συνεργεῖν (in Rom 8% AB and Origen), πλεονεκτεῖν (four times, and once in passive), and χορηγεῖν. The third part of Krebs’ work deals with and from dat. ‘compound verbs and their cases. Here and gen. after . . 18 . compounds, προσφωνεῖν c. acc. may claim Lk 6%, but it has the dat. four times; ὑποτρέχειν has acc. in its only occurrence; ἐπέρχεσθαι has only dat. or prepositional phrase; καταβαρεῖν occurs once, c. acc.; καταλαλεῖν takes gen. in NT, but is once passive, as is καταπονεῖν in its two occurrences ; while κατισχύειν shows no sign of the acc. construction. ΝΕ It would of course be easy to supplement Arma ofthe from the NT grammar these illustrations of urring of old ᾿ . . distinctions, 8. general tendency, but exhaustive discussion is not needed here. We must proceed to note a few special characteristics of the individual cases as they appear in NT Greek, in uses deviating from earlier
Accusative gains from genitive,
from intransitive construction,
1 Νηδέν͵ if not to be read μηδέν᾽, is an internal accus., nil desperantes.
2A passage from Dionysius (Krebs 16), οὔτε θεῖον φοβηθέντες χόλον οὔτε ἀνθρωπίνην évrparévres νέμεσιν, bears a curiously close resemblance to Lk 183,
8. See further, p. 235.
5
66 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
language. Before doing so, however, we must make some general observations, by way of applying to noun syntax the principles noted above, p. 20. We should not assume, from the evidence just presented as to variation of case with verbs, that the old distinctions of case-meaning have vanished, or that we may treat as mere equivalents those constructions which are found in common with the same word. The very fact that in Jn 433 προσκυνεῖν is found with dat. and then with acc. is enough to prove the existence of a difference, subtle no doubt but real, between the two, unless the writer is guilty of a most improbable slovenliness. The fact that the maintenance of an old and well-known distinction between the acc. and the gen. with ἀκούω saves the author of Ac 9’ and 22° from a patent self-contradiction, should by itself be enough to make us recognise it for Luke, and for other writers until it is proved wrong. So with the subtle and suggestive variation in Heb 64! from gen. to acc. with yeverOar.1° Further, the argument that because εἰς often denotes rest an or at, and sometimes represents that motion towards (as distinguished from motion ¢o) which may perhaps have been the primitive differentia of the dat., therefore it is immaterial whether εἰς or ἐν or the simple dat. be used with any par- ticular word, would be entirely unwarrantable. It depends upon the character of the word itself. If its content be limited, it may well happen that hardly any appreciable difference is made by placing it in one or another of cer- tain nearly equivalent relations to a noun. But if it isa word of large content and extensive use, we naturally expect to find these alternative expressions made use of to define the different ideas connected with the word they qualify, so as to set up a series of phrases having a perfectly distinct meaning. In such a case we should expect to see the original force of these expressions, obsolete in contexts where there was no-

1To illustrate with a lexical example, we need not think that the evidence which proves ἐρωτᾶν in the vernacular no longer restricted to the meaning question (cf Expos. νι. viii. 431), compromises the antithesis between the verbs in Jn 16%, rightly given by RVmg.’ Our English ask is the complete equivalent of the Hellenistic ἐρωτᾶν ; and if we translated αἰτήσητε by some other word, say beg or petition, we should naturally take ask to mean question there. See West- cott or Milligan-Moulton in Zoc., or Loisy, Le Quatrigme Evangile, Ὁ. 789.
2See p. 245.
SYNTAX: THE NOUN. 67
thing to quicken it, brought out vividly where the need of a distinction stimulated it into new life. A critical example is afforded by the construction of πιστεύω, as to which Blass (p. 110) declares that (beside the prepositional construction, with the meaning “ believe in ἢ) it takes the dat. “passtm even in the sense ‘to believe in, as in Ac 5144188”! Again, p. 123, “ πιστεύειν εἰς alternates with mor. ἐν (Mk 1%) and πιστ. ἐπί, in addition to which the correct classical muot. τινί appears.” Let us examine this. In classical Greek, as LS observe, “the two notions [believe and believe in] run into each other.” To be unable to distinguish ideas so vitally different in the scheme of Christianity would certainly have been a serious matter for the NT writers. Blass allows that with the preposition the meaning is believe in. Is this meaning ever found with the simple dat., or is πιστεύειν τινί appro- priated entirely for the other idea? The answer must, it would seem, come from examination of the NT passages, rather than from outside. There are about forty occurrences of πιστεύειν with dat., apart from those where the verb means entrust. It will be admitted that in the great majority of these passages the meaning is believe. There remain a few passages where the alternative is arguable, such as Jn 5% 88 (in which the λύγος just preceding shows that believe is more appropriate), 8°! (where the variation from the previous 7. εἰς . cannot be merely accidental), Ac 515 (where the dat. may be construed with προσετέθεντο, as in RV), 16% and 18° (where accepting the truth of God’s word satisfies the connexion). (See p. 235.) It might be said that the influence of the LXX tends to weaken the normal distinction in the phrase π. τῷ Oem. But it is very clear that the LXX is not re- sponsible for the NT use of πιστεύειν. The only pre- positional phrase used in the LXX is that with ἐν, which is itself very rare, and this occurs in only one NT passage, Mk 1%, where there can be little doubt that Deissmann is right® in translating “believe in (the sphere οἵ)" the
Construction of πιστεύω.
1 The second passage is dropped in ἦ, but not in the English edition.
2 Eph 115 is only an apparent exception, for the second ἐν ᾧ is assimilated to the first, and its sense is determined by ἐσφραγίσθητε.
3 In Christo 46 f. [See p. 245,
68 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
Gospel”: he compares 1 Th 37, Rom 1°, 2 Co 88 10", ete. The construction quot. ἐπί, which outside John is commoner than εἰς, is found in Is 28:6, where B omits ἐπί, and conformity to the NT application of the passage may well have occasioned its insertion in ΑΘ. It would seem therefore as if the substitution of εἰς or ἐπί for the simple dative may have ob- tained currency first in Christian circles, where the import- ance of the difference between mere belief (? PONT) and personal trust (2) was keenly realised. The prepositional construc- tion was suggested no doubt by its being a more literal translation of the Hebrew phrase with 3. But in itself it was entirely on the lines of development of the Greek language, as we have seen. There was, moreover, a fitness in it for the use for which it was specialised. To repose one’s trust upon God or Christ was well expressed by πιστεύειν ἐπί, the dative suggesting more of the state, and the accus- ative more of the initial act of faith ; while εἰς recalls at once the bringing of the soul into that mystical union which Paul loved to express by ἐν Χριστῷ But as between ἐπί and eis, we may freely admit that it is not safe to refine too much: the difference may amount to little more than that between our own believe on and believe in.1 The really im- portant matter is the recognition of a clear distinction between believe on or in and believe with the dative simply.”
1 For a closely allied equivalence, cf that of ἐν and ἐπὶ τῷ ὀνόματι, as de- monstrated by Heitmiiller, Im Namen Jesu (19038), 1. ch. i.
2 We may give a table of the constructions of πιστεύω, when not absolute, and not=entrust. As elsewhere, it depends on WH text, ignoring passages in [[ J].
c. ἐπί ὁ. els -- ὁ .] ©. ἐν 6. dat. | Total. l dat. j acc Mt .... 1 — 1 — 4 6 Mk .... — -- -- 1 1 2 Lk and Ac. . 3 1 4 - 9 17 -JnandilJdn. . 37 --- — --- 18 55 Paul . 3 4 2 — 6 15 Jas. — — — -- 1 1 1 Pet 1 1 -- — -- 2
Total . 45 | 6 | 7 1 39 98
1 Jn 416 is omitted, as ἐγνώκαμεν determines the construction. So also are Ac 5'4 and Eph 1°, for reasons given above.
SYNTAX: THE NOUN. 69
We have still to gather some noteworthy of ta points in the use of the cases, particularly Nominative. the Nominative, on which nothing has been said hitherto. The case has a certain tend- ency to be residuary legatee of case-relations not obviously appropriated by other cases. We have its use as the name- case, unaltered by the construction of the sentence, in Rev 911; the fact that this has classical parallels (see Blass 85) is perhaps only accidental, for we have already seen that ungrammatical nominatives are prevalent in Rev (see p. 9), and the general NT usage is certainly assimilation (Mt 1”, Mk 336, Ac 271). The classical parallels may serve for a writer such as Luke, if we are to write ἐλαιών in Lk 1939 2137, In WH and the RV it is ἐλαιῶν, gen. pl., and so Blass. We noted above (p. 49) the conclusive evidence which compels us to accept the noun ἐλαιών, olivetum, as a word current in the Κοινή WH (App 158) regard the presence of ᾿Ελαιῶνος in Ac 113 as corroborating the argument drawn from the unambiguous τὸ ὄρος τῶν ἐλαιῶν. Tertullian’s in Elaeonem secedebat, the prevalence of olivetum in the Latin versions, and the new fact (unknown to WH) that ἐλαιών is a word abundantly occurring in the vernacular, may together perhaps incline us rather to the other view, with Deissmann, Tischendorf, Tregelles, and Weiss (cf W. F. Moulton’s note in WM 227). Certainly, if we were forced to emend on conjecture, to substitute ᾿Ελαιῶνα in Lk ll.cc.—in one of which places the initial a. following makes it especially easy—would cause much less disturbance than to force Blass’s ἐλαιῶν upon Acts and Josephus. (See further on p. 235.)
The nominative which stands at the head of a clause without construction is a familiar phenomenon hardly needing to be illustrated: it is one of the easiest of anacolutha, and as much at home in English as in Greek. The special case in which the participle is concerned will en- gage our attention later (p. 225). Typical exx. are Lk 218, Ac 7”, Mt 54 Ὁ (ὁ θέλων... ἄφες αὐτῷ ---- ἃ plausible reading, as τῷ θέλοντι is an easy correction), 1 Jn 2%, Rev 2%, etc.
The parenthetic nominative in expressions of time is well
“ Nominativus Pendens.”
70 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
seen in Mt 15%, Mk 835, also Lk 9%, In popular Attic the construction goes as far back as v/B.c.1 Viteau (Sujet 41) cites Parenthetic Eccles 236 (note emendation in A and xe 8.) and Nominative, 508 1%. On the latter Nestle notes (Hzp T xvi. 429) that B (ἔτι ἡμέραι τρεῖς καὶ δια- βαίνετε) gives the rationale.” Deissmann adds from the Acta Pauli et Theclae (in OP i. p. 9) ἡμέραι yap ἤδη τρεῖς καὶ νύκτες τρεῖς Θέκλα οὐκ ἐγήγερται2 We must leave it an open ques- tion whether Ac 5’ (see p. 16) belongs to this category: it means an isolated return to the construction of éyévero which Luke used in his Gospel, but then abandoned. This may not however be quite decisive. The use of parenthetic nominat- ives appears in the papyri most abundantly in descriptions with ovAn or γείτονες. Thus “elxoves”? will run, “to A. long-faced, straight-nosed, a scar on his right wrist”; and a piece of land or a house is inventoried with “ belonging to A., its neighbours on the south the open street, on the west the house of B.”—all nominatives without construction. We compare such examples as Jn 1%, There is a very marked increase in the Articular use of the articular nominative in address. Nominative . . . in address. Nearly sixty examples of it are found in the NT. There seems no sufficient reason for assigning any influence to the coincident Hebrew use, for classical Greek shows the idiom well established. The rough and peremptory tone which characterises most of the other examples seems to have disappeared. Contrast the Aristo- phanic ὁ παῖς ἀκολούθει, “you there! the lad, I mean” (Blass), with the tender ἡ παῖς ἔγειρε3 in Lk 854: we may still recognise a survival of the decisiveness of the older use. Descriptiveness, however, 18 rather the note of the articular nom. of address in the NT: so in Lk 1255, Jn 19%, where we may represent the nuance by “Fear not, you little flock!” “Hail, you ‘King’!” In the latter passage we can easily feel the inappropriateness of the βασιλεῦ found in τὲ, which would admit the royal right, as in Ac 26’. Its appearance
1 Meisterhans® 203. See CR xvii. 197, where Croénert reads in BM ii. 299 (no. 417—iv/A.D.) ἐπειδὴ ἀσχολῶ ἐλθῖῆν πρὸς σὲν αὐτὲ (=-al) ἡμέρε, ‘this diebus ” —a violent example if true. Cfp. 11 n.! ad jin. [*See p. 245.
2 See p. 235.
SYNTAX: THE NOUN. 71
in Mk 1538 is merely a note of the writer's imperfect sensibility to the more delicate shades of Greek idiom. Note that Lk, and perhaps Mt (AJL), cor- rect Mk here. The anarthrous nom. should probably be regarded as a mere substitute for the vocative, which begins from the earliest times to be supplanted by the nominative. In MGr the forms in -e are practically the only separate vocatives surviving. Hellenistic has little more, retaining some in -a and -ed, with the isolated γύναι, πάτερ, and θύγατερ; but the nom. is beginning to assert itself even here, for zarjp1* and θυγάτηρ are well attested (see the evidence in Blass 86 n.). The vocative itself need not detain us, the presence or absence of ὦ being the only feature calling for comment. In the Lucan writings only is the interjection used in the classical manner without emphasis. Elsewhere it is mostly used as we use OQ, except that this is with us appropriate in prayer, from which it is markedly absent in the NT, though not entirely in the translation Greek of the OT. The progressive omission of ὦ is not wholly easy to explain, for the classical examples (see Gerth’s Kiihner® § 357. 4) show that the simple voc. has normally a touch of dignity or reserve. A specially good ex. occurs in Plato Crito 52a, ταύταις δή φαμεν καὶ σέ, Σώκρατες, ταῖς αἰτίαις ἐνέξεσθαι, where “the effect of omitting ὦ is to increase the impressiveness, since ὦ Σώκρατες is the regular mode of address: in English we obtain the same effect by exactly the opposite means” (Adam). NT use has thus approximated to our own, and may well have travelled upon the same path without any outside interference, such as A. Buttmann would find in Latinism.?
Common to nominative and accusative is the use of ets with acc. to replace a predicate, in such phrases as εἶναι εἰς and ἐγείρειν εἰς (Ac 833 13”). This cannot fairly be described
Vocative.
1 There seems no adequate reason to write πάτηρ, as WH (App 158).
3J. A. Scott, in AJP xxvi. 32-43, has a careful study of the classical use of ὦ. He shows that ὦ ‘‘ with the vocative was familiar, and was not freely used until the familiar language of comedy, dialectic, and the law courts became the language of literature, when the vocative rarely appears without the inter- jection.” The Attic sermo vulgaris in this case did not determine the usage of the Hellenistic vernacular. [See p. 245.
72 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
as a Hebraism, for the vernacular shows a similar extension of the old use of εἰς expressing destination: so for example KP 46 (ii/a.v.), ἔσχον map’ ὑμῶν εἰς δά(νειον) σπέρματα, a recurrent formula. It is obvious that “I received it as a loan” and “707. ἃ loan” do not differ except in grammar. The fact that this εἰς is mainly found in translation falls into line with other phenomena already discussed—the overdoing of a correct locution in passages based on a Semitic original, simply because it has the advantage of being a literal rendering.
was We may pass over the accusative, as Genitive. Jittle remains to be said of it except on points of detail. As to the genitive, readers of Winer will perhaps hardly need reminding now-a-days that to call the case “ unquestionably the whence-case” is an utterly obsolete procedure. The Greek genitive is syncretic (cf p. 61); and the ablative, the only case which answers to Winer’s “ case of proceeding from or out of,” is responsible for a part of the ases of the genitive in which it was merged. Most of the ordinary divisions of the case we find still in extensive use. The objective gen. is very prominent, and exegesis has often to discuss the application of this or the subjective label to a particular phrase. It is as well to remember that in Greek this question is entirely one of exegesis, not of grammar. There is no approximation to the development by which we have restricted the inflexional genitive in our language almost entirely to the subjective use. The partitive gen. is largely replaced by the abl. with ἀπό or éx,* but is still used freely, sometimes in peculiar phrases. In Mt -28! (RV) we have ὀψέ with this gen., “late on the sabbath :” οὗ Tb P 230 (ii/B.c.) ὀψίτερον τῆς ὥρας, and Par P 35, 37 (ii/B.c.) ὀψὲ τῆς ὥρας, and Philostratus (ap. Blass? 312) ὀψὲ τῶν Τρωικῶν, “at a late stage in the Trojan war.” This last writer however has also ὀψὲ τούτων, “after these things,” and Blass now (i.c.) adopts this meaning in Mt, giving other quotations. This use of owe = after involves an ablative gen., “late from.” There remains the vespere sabbati of the Latt. and the Lewis Syr., favoured by Weiss, Wright, etc. Since oye could be used practically as an indeclinable noun (see Mk 11" al), this seems
a natural development, but the question is not easy to “See p. 245.
Predicates with εἰς.
SYNTAX: THE NOUN. 73
decide. How freely the partitive gen. was used in the Κοινή may be seen in passages like Ac 2116 where it is subject of a sentence. See WM 253 for classical parallels: add OGIS 56° ὁ προφήτης ἤ TOY... ἱερέων. . . οἴσει. How unnecessary it was there for Dittenberger to insert res, may be seen from the standing phrase ὁ δεῖνα τῶν φίλων, “ X., one of the Privy Council” (as Par P 15 (ii/B.c.), etc.). " The papyri show us abundantly the Ted Pisce. genitive of time and place, like νότου “on the south,” ἔτους β “in the 2nd year.” It comes most naturally from the simplest of all genitives, that of possession, “ belonging to”; but the abl. is possible, as we find the place idea expressed in Rev 21% by ἀπὸ νότου. “Time or place within which”—cf rod ὄντος μηνός “ within the current month,” FP 124 (ii/a.D.)—is the normal differentia of this genitive, which’ has thus perhaps its closest affinity with the partitive. For time, this genitive is common in NT, as in phrases like νυκτός, χειμῶνος, ὄρθρου βαθέως, τοῦ λοιποῦ. For place, we have mostly stereotyped words and phrases like ποίας Lk 5, and ancient words like αὐτοῦ, ποῦ. It is strange that the commentators and grammarians have so much neglected the difficult gen. in Ac 19%, Dr Knowling merely declines Hackett’s suggestion that ᾿Εφέσου and πάσης τῆς ᾿Ασίας depend on ὄχλον, for which however we might quote a good parallel in Sophocles O7 236 (see Jebb). The gloss ἕως (D), “within,” may possibly express the meaning; but the vernacular supplies no parallel, except the stereotyped phrases for points of the compass, nor was it ever normal in classical Greek after the Epic period: see the exx., nearly all poetical, in Kiihner-Gerth i. 384f. On the whole, one feels disposed to make ὄχλον responsible after all. . The question of Hebraism is raised again by the genitive of definition. Some of the “long series of phrases” coming

1 See below, p. 101, for a construction which may be parallel. There is a note in Dalman’s Gram. d. jiid.-pal. Aram. p. 197, in which Lightfoot’s papa (Hor. Hebr. 500) is tentatively approved as the original of éyé. The phrase ‘‘means always the time immediately a/ter the close of the Sabbath.” In Mt 28), accordingly, ‘‘at most a late hour of the night would be designated: the term is impossible for dawn. A reckoning of the Sabbath from sunrise to sunrise (Weiss zn Zoc.) is unheard of.”
74 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
under this head “obviously take their origin from Hebrew,” says Blass (p. 98). The poetical examples collected in Jebb’s note on Sophocles, Anti. 114 (or more fully in Kiihner-Gerth, p. 264), include some which are quite as remarkable as the “ Hebraisms” quotable from the NT. Thus καρδία πονηρὰ ἀπιστίας (Heb 31%) will pair off well with τόσονδε τόλμης πρόσωπον (Soph. OZ 533). That many of these phrases really are literal translations from the Hebrew need not be questioned; and if an existing usage was available for the purpose, we can understand its being overstrained. Our only concern is with passages where no Semitic original is admissible. In these it seems fair to assume that the poetical phraseology of the Attic period had come down into the market-place, as happened also, for example, in ἀπείραστος κακῶν Jas 1%, ἀκαταπάστους (p. 47) ἁμαρτίας 2 Pet 214, which have plentiful illustration from papyri.!
The rapid extension of the genitive absolute is a very obvious feature of Hel- lenistic Greek—so obvious, indeed, that we are not tempted to dwell on it here. In the papyri it may often be seen forming a string of statements, without a finite verb for several lines. We also find there a use frequently seen in the NT—eg., in Mt 118 81 918. Mk 131, Lk 12%, Ac 221”, etc.—the gen. abs. referring to a noun or pronoun already in the sentence, without any effort to assimilate the cases.” Rarely in NT, but frequently in papyri, we find a participle standing by itself in gen. abs. without a noun or pronoun in agreement: thus Mt 1715, Ac 21%. <A violent use occurs in Heb 89 (LXX) ἐν ἡμέρᾳ ἐπιλαβομένου pov: so Blass, but the construction was probably suggested immediately by the original Hebrew. Westcott compares Barn 2% ἐν ἡμέρᾳ ἐντειλ.- apévov cov avT@. The old accus.abs., belonging to impersonal verbs, has vanished except in the word τυχόν “ perhaps” (1 Co 16°): Blass points out how Luke avoids it in Ac 23°, where classical Greek would demand μηνυθ έν c. ace. et inf. The papyri show ἐξόντος passim for the classical ἐξόν, ἐξ being allowed.
Genitive of Definition.
Genitive Absolute.
1 See p. 235. 3 Cf exx. from Polybius in Kilker 281 ; and below, p. 236.
SYNTAX: THE NOUN. 75
One example of a noteworthy pure dative, the dativus incommedi, may be briefly referred to. In Rev 2° 16 ἔρχομαι oot is used rather markedly in place of ἔ. πρός σε: a reason
for the peculiar phraseology is offered in Deentive of —. JTS iii. 516. It should however be added isadvantage. . now that the very phrase occurs in a recently published papyrus, BU 1041 (ii/a.p.), an illiterate document, with context less clear than we should like. See p. 245. Side by side with the common Jlocative
_Datives of dative of time (point of time), we have an time, reference, . : . . accompaniment. enstrumental dative of extension of time,
which is not always easy to distinguish from it. Thus in Lk 8” πολλοῖς χρόνοις is “ oftentimes” (loc.) in RV text, “of a long time” (instr.) in mg. The latter, which is clearly found in χρόνῳ ἱκανῷ Lk 8”, and χρόνοις αἰωνίοις Rom 16%, is supported by the recurring formula in private letters, ἐρρῶσθαί σε εὔχομαι πολλοῖς χρόνοις The field of accusative and instrumental is contiguous also in the “ dative of reference”: yévec in Mk 776, Ac 486 al, as in BU 887 (ii/A.D.) γένει Φρυγίαν. Jn 69 affords one of the few NT exx. of the acc. in similar construction. TP 1 (ii/B.c.) προβεβη- κότας ἤδη τοῖς ἔτεσιν (class.), compared with Lk 17-18 236, shows how the ubiquitous ἐν came in with datives that did not need it: here we may presume an Aramaic background. A difficult dative in Rev 84, ταῖς προσευχαῖς (RV text “ with the prayers,’ and so Milligan and Holtzmann), is probably to be taken as the sociative instrumental: cf BU 69 (ii/a.p.) ἃς καὶ ἀποδώσω σοι τῷ ἔνγιστα δοθησομένῳ ὀψωνίῳ, “ with (1.6. at the time of) my next wages.” Cf Abbott Joh. Gr. 519. .Ν Finally, we may speak of one more dative
‘‘ Hebraic - > a oy Dative. use, that of which ἀκοῇ ἀκούσετε, Mt 13%, will serve as a type. In giving a list of these phrases, Blass (p. 119) remarks that “the usage is an imitation of the Hebrew infinite absolute like Mv nip, and is consequently found already in the LXX”; also that “the analogous classical phrases such as γάμῳ γαμεῖν (‘in true

1 'W. Schulze (Gr. Lat. 14) would make Latin responsible for the first start of this extension. But it must be allowed that the classical phrase τῷ χρόνῳ, ‘*'by lapse of time,” was capable of giving the impulse. For the antiquity of this instrumental, see Delbriick, Grundr. 8109. Cf CR xv. 438, xviii. 153.
76 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
wedlock ’), φυγῇ φεύγειν (‘to flee with all speed’) are only accidentally similar to these.” There are two points here on which we might venture to state the case rather differently. It may be freely allowed that this construction, and that with the participle (βλέποντες βλέψετε) are examples of “ translation Greek.” But in what sense are they imitations of the Hebrew? It seems to me that such a description implies something much nearer and more literal, such as ἀκούειν ἀκούσετε Is it then mere accident that we find the Hebrew locution represented by Greek which recalls respectively the γάμῳ γαμεῖν and φυγῇ φεύγειν quoted by Blass, and the well- known Aeschylean οἱ πρῶτα μὲν βλέποντες ἔβλεπον μάτην, κλύοντες οὐκ ἤκουον (P.V. 4471
or the φεύγων ἐκφεύγει of Herodotus? The Greek translator, endeavouring to be as literal as he could, nevertheless took care to use Greek that was possible, however unidiomatic.* Those who have had to do much in the way of marking classical examination papers, know very well that “ possible, but unidiomatic,” is a good general description of the kind of language used by translators who have attained the con- scientious accuracy, but not the sure-footed freedom, of the mature scholar.
1 As we actually find in Jos 171% ἐξολεθρεῦσαι δὲ αὐτοὺς οὐκ ἐξωλέθρευσαν : A emends ὀλεθρεύσει. (1 owe this to Votaw, p. 56.)
2 The idea of these words became proverbial : cf [Demosthenes] 797, ὥστε, τὸ τῆς παροιμίας, ὁρῶντας μὴ ὁρᾶν καὶ ἀκούοντας μὴ ἀκούειν. Of course the resem- blance to Mt ζ.6. is more superficial than real, for Aeschylus means ‘‘ though they saw, they saw in vain.” But there is enough nearness to suggest the NT form as possible Greek. An exact parallel is quoted by Winer from Lucian (Dial. Marin. iv. 8) ἰδὼν εἶδον : the participle has vanished in the Teubner text, whether with or without MS authority I cannot stop to examine. It should be made penal to introduce emendations into classical texts without a footnote !
9See p. 245.
CHAPTER V. ADJECTIVES, PRONOUNS, PREPOSITIONS.
.,. . THERE is not much to be said under the ses oualite > head of Adjectives, except on the important "© Duality ” question raised by the phenomena
of comparison. The question touches the use of dual pronouns of the ἕτερος class, as well as the relation between comparative and superlative. The abolition of a dis- tinction between duality and plurality is almost inevitable sooner or later in language history. English affords us instructive parallels. The simplicity and convenience of our suffixes -er and -est have helped to preserve in common speech the old degrees of comparison. But how often does the man in the street say “the better of the two”? One would not like to say offhand how far in this matter modern litera- ture is impeccable on Lindley Murray rules; but in conver- sation the most correct of us may at times be caught tripping, and even when the comparative is used we are most of us conscious of a kind of pedantic accuracy. That “the best of the two” is the English of the future is a fairly safe assertion. Whether, adjectivally, is as archaic as arorepos:} when we translate τίνα ἀπὸ τῶν δύο (Mt 27%) by the archaism “whether of the twain,” we are only advertising the fact that the original was normal speech and our trans- lation artificial. We have not yet arrived at “either of the three,” but people say “either A. or B. or OC.” without a qualm. Of course the first step was taken ages ago in the extinction of the dual, the survival of which in Germanic
1] have twelve papyrus collections by me, with one occurrence of πότερος in the indices, and that is nearly illegible and (to me, at least) quite unintelligible (AP 135, ii/a.p.).
ΤΊ
78 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
is evidenced, centuries after the NT, by Wulfila’s Gothic. Other modern languages tell the same tale. In the NT the obsolescence of the superlative, except in the elative sense, is most marked. It is mere chance that only one example of the -ratos superlative has survived,! for there are scores of them in the papyri. Of the genuine superlative sense, however, the examples there are very rare; practically we may say that in the vernacular documents the superlative forms are used to express the sense of our “very.” The confusion of comparative and superlative is well seen in some illiterate papyri, where phrases like τὸ μέγιστον καὶ γνησιώτερον occur. One or two typical examples of irregular comparatives may be cited —the references will be found, with other examples, in CR xv. 439 and xviii 154. Specially instructive is the papyrus of the astronomer Eudoxus, written in ii/B.c. There we have καθ᾽ ὃν ὁ ἥλιος φερόμενος τὴν μὲν ἡμέραν Bpayv- τέραν ποιεῖ τὴν δὲ νύκτα μακροτέραν. The context demands a superlative, and Blass no doubt rightly assumes that the author (iv/B.c.) wrote βραχυτάτην and μακροτάτην. In that case the scribe’s alteration is very significant. He has in the same way altered μεγίστῃ to μειξόνει in another place, and he writes ἐν ἑκατέρωι τῶν ξωιδίων for “in each of the (twelve) signs.” In Tb P 33 (1{8.0) we have ἐν μείζονι ἀξιώματι, an elative? It is in fact clear that μέγιστος is practically obsolete in Hellenistic: its appearance in 2 Pet is as significant as its absence from the rest of the NT. The Revisers’ scrupulous margin in 1 Co 13 and Mt 18} may be safely dispensed with, on the new evidence. Kpeirrwy and χείρων are always strictly comparative in NT, but they have no superlatives:? κράτιστος is only a title. Βελτίων 3 (in adv.) occurs once,in 2 Tim 1%, but does not appear in any of Grenfell and Hunt’s papyri, except in an official Ptolemaic document: βέλτιστος (not in NT) has a somewhat better claim (ter in ii/B.c.). ᾿Αμείνων and ἄριστος (not N T) appear occasionally. Note especially OP 716 (ii/a.D.) τὴν ἀμείνονα
in Comparison,
1 Ac 26°, in true superlative sense ; this speech 1 is much affected by literary
style. - 2 See p. 236 below.
ADJECTIVES, PRONOUNS, PREPOSITIONS. 78
αἵρεσιν διδόντι, “ to the highest bidder.” Yet ἄριστος is found in OP 292 (i/a.D.), a vernacular document, but the sole witness among the papyri named. ᾿Ελάσσων is common, but ἐλάχιστος (a true superl. in 1 Co 15°, as in Tb P 24 (ii/B.c.)—an official document, but in very bad Greek) has not wholly disappeared. Πλείων and πλεῖστος are common, but the latter is generally elative in the papyri—note however Tb P 105 (ii/B.c) τὴν ἐσομένην πλείστην τιμήν, and other exx. which may support 1 Co 147, Mt 11% may show the elative—“ those very numerous mighty works”; but the other rendering is as good. In Jn 1 πρῶτός μου, and 158 πρῶτον ὑμῶν, we have the superlative ousting the comparative. Winer quotes Aelian -(WM 306), and we can add σοῦ πρῶτός εἶμι from LPw (ii/iii a.D.—-magic).* There seems no longer adequate reason to question that πρότερος has here been superseded ; for the great rarity of the comparative form in the papyri reinforces the natural inference from Jn U.ce. In the Grenfell- Hunt volumes it only occurs once, in a legal document. The mere use of πρῶτος in Ac 1}, it must be allowed, proves very little as to the author’s intention to write a third treatise. Ramsay himself (Paul, p. 28) admits that the absence of πρότερος from the Lucan writings precludes certainty for the hypothesis. See further p. 236. [#See p. 245:
The case is not quite so strong for the pronouns. There are plenty of places where repos, ἑκάτερος, ὁπότερος, etc.,are used of more than two, and ἄλλος of two only; but also places where the pronouns are used carefully according to classical precedent. It seems a fair assumption that these words held much the same relative position as was described just now for our own comparative and superlative in phrases like “the better (best) of two.” Educated men would know the distinction and observe it, unless off their guard. In these cases we must let the context decide, paying due attention to the degree of grammatical precision usually attained by each several author. It is remarkable that in this respect we find Luke by no means particular. In Lk 868 he actually substitutes érepos for the correct ἄλλος which appears in his presumed source, Mk 4535 (cf Mt 135%); and in Lk 6” he does not alter τὴν ἄλλην (σιαγόνα !) which appears also in Mt 5®, but is corrected
and in Pronouns.
80 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
in Clem. Hom. 15% This will clearly need remembering when we examine other “dual” words in Luke.! See pp. 245f.
A difficulty under this head is raised by Ac 1916. The probability that ἀμφότεροι was used for πάντες in BM 336 (ii/a.D.), and two clear examples of it in NP 67 and 69 (iv/a.D.)? with the undeniable Byzantine use, form a strong temptation where the relief would be so great.2 I cannot but think that Ramsay is quite right in saying (Paul, p. 272), “ The seven sons in v.* change in an unintelligible way to two in v.'® (except in the Bezan text).” Luke must have been a very slovenly writer if he really meant this, and the Bezan reading of v.* does not help us to understand how the more difficult “neutral text” arose if it really was secondary. On the other hand, Luke is one of the last NT writers whom we should expect to fall into a colloquialism of which early examples are so rare: that he shares the loose use of ἕτερος, etc., current in his time, does nothing to mitigate this improbability. If we are to defend these verses from Ramsay’s criticisms—and in a purely grammatical discussion we cannot deal with them except on this side—must we not assume that the original text of v.' is lost 75 If this contained a fuller statement, the abruptness of τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ πονηρόν in v.44, and of our ἀμφοτέρων, might be removed without compromising the characteristic ἑπτά: we wight also have a clearer term to describe Sceva’s office. The alternative is to suppose the verses an interpo- lation from a less educated source, which has been imperfectly adapted to Luke’s style.‘
We pass on to the Article, on which there is not very much to say, since in all essentials its use is in agreement
᾿Αμφότεροι = all ?
1The aberrant ἕτερον. . . ἄλλον in Lk 7 B is most simply explained by supposing that the scribe has found a place for two variants. If we press the reading, the messengers are represented as softening the message,—no longer ‘“Canother kind of Messiah,” but ‘‘another of the same kind”: ef Gal 1%, The meaning ‘‘ different” naturally developed out of ‘‘the other class (of two),” and it survived when the normal use of ἕτερος had faded out. See also p. 246.
2 A much earlier ex. seemed to present itself in the just published BU 1057 (13 B.c.); but I think the ἀμφοτέρων can be otherwise referred than to the three names immediately preceding.
8 See notes in Expos. VI. viii. 426 and CR xv. 440.
4 The Sahidic and some later versions took ἀμφοτέρων as ‘‘all.” Were this better supported, we should find another ex. in Ac 23° [6 See p. 246.
ADJECTIVES, PRONOUNS, PREPOSITIONS, 81
with Attic. It,might indeed be asserted that the NT is in this respect remarkably “correct” when compared with the papyri. It shows no trace of the use of the me Artie ἐν, article as a relative, which is found in classical of NT Greek. Greek outside Attic, in the later papyri,! and to some extent in MGr. The papyri likewise exhibit some examples of the article as demonstra- tive, apart from connexion with μέν or δέ, whereas the NT has no ex. beyond the poetical quotation in Ac 17%, Further, we have nothing answering to the vernacular idiom by which the article may be omitted between preposition and infini- tive. In family or business accounts among the papyri we find with significant frequency an item of so much εἰς πεῖν, with the dative of the persons for whom this thoughtful provision is made. There are three passages in Herodotus where ἀντί behaves thus: see vi. 32, ἀντὶ elvas, with Strachan’s note, and Goodwin, M7 ὃ 803 (see further below, p. 216). In these three points we may possibly recognise Ionic influence showing itself in a limited part of the vernacular; it is at least noteworthy that Herodotus will supply parallels for them all. The Ionic elements in the Kown were briefly alluded to above (pp. 37 f.), where other evidence was noted for the sporadic character of these infusions, and their tendency to enlarge their borders in the later development of the Common Greek. | We are not much troubled with Hebra- ism under the article? Blass (p. 151) regards as “thoroughly Hebraic” such phrases as πρὸ προσώπου Κυρίου, ἐν ὀφθαλμοῖς ἡμῶν, ἐν ἡμέρᾳ ὀργῆς ; but κατ᾽ οἶκον αὐτῶν “is a regular phrase and perhaps not a Hebraism.” Where Semitic originals lie behind . our Greek, the dictum is unobjectionable ; but the mere admis- sion that κατ᾽’ οἶκον αὐτῶν is Greek shows how slightly these phrases diverge from the spirit of the translator’s language. Phrases like τοὺς ἐν οἴκῳ, διὰ χειρὸς ἐξ οἴκου, etc., are recurrent in the papyri, and the extension, such as it is, lies in the addition of a dependent genitive? The principle of “correlation” (on which see the note in WM,
Hebraisms ?
1See Volker 5f.; also CR xviii. 155. 2360 Ὁ. 236. ὅ See pp. 99f. 6
82 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
p. 175) here supports the strong tendency to drop the article after a preposition. This is seen working in the papyri: cf Volker, Der Artikel pp. 15-17. Without laying down a law that the noun is naturally Anarthrous = anarthrous when attached to a preposition, Prepositional . . Phrases, | We may certainly say that the usage is so pre- dominant that no refinements of interpreta- tion are justifiable. Obviously ἐν οἴκῳ (Mk 21) is not “in a house,” nor ἐν dyopa (Lk 7) “in @ market-place,” nor ἐν ἀγυιᾷ, in the current papyrus formula, “in ὦ street.” We say “down town,” “on ’Change,” “in bed,” “from start to finish.”1 If we substitute “in my bed,” “from the beginning to the end,” we are, it seems, more pictorial; we point, as it were, to the objects in question. There is nothing indefinite about the anarthrous noun there; but for some reason the qualitative aspect of a noun, rather than the deictic, is appropriate to a prepositional phrase, unless we have special reason to point to it the finger of emphatic particularisation. To this Dr Findlay adds the consideration that the phrases in question are familiar ones, in which triteness has reduced their distinctiveness, and promoted a tendency to abbreviate, It would seem that English here is on the same lines as Greek, which, however, makes the anarthrous use with prepositions much more predominant than it is with us. Pursuing further Anarthrous the classes: of words in which we insert the “Headings.” 12 translation, we have the anarthrous use “in sentences having the nature of headings” (Hort, 2 Peter, Ὁ. 150). Hort assigns to this cause the dropped articles before θεοῦ, πνεύματος and αἵματος in 1 Pet 12; Winer cites the opening words of Mt, Mk, and Rev. The lists of words which specially affect the dropped Qualitative article will, of course, need careful examina- Force in tion for the individual cases. Thus, when Anarthrous Winer includes πατήρ in his list, and quotes Nouns. Jn 1 and Heb 12’, we must feel that in both passages the qualitative force 1s very apparent—
1 According to Ramsay (Paul, p. 195), παρὰ ποταμόν, Ac 16%, shows famili- arity with the locality. To accept this involves giving up ἐνομίέζομεν προσευχήν (nA ΒΟ), a step not to be lightly taken. (See further p. 236.)
ADJECTIVES, PRONOUNS, PREPOSITIONS. 83
“what son is there whom his father, as a father, does not chasten?” (On the former passage see RV margin, and the note in WM 151.) For exegesis, there are few of the finer points of Greek which need more constant attention than this omission of the article when the writer would lay stress on the quality or character of the object. Even the RV misses this badly sometimes, as in Jn 668,1 Scholarship has not yet solved completely the problem of the article with proper names. An illuminating little paper by Gildersleeve may be referred to (AJP xi. 483-7), in which he summarises some elaborate researches by Κι. Schmidt, and adds notes of his own. He shows that this use, which was equivalent to pointing at a man, was originally popular, and practically affects only prose style. The usage of different writers varies greatly ; and the familiar law that the article is used of a person already named (anaphoric use), or well known already, is not uni- formly observed. Deissmann has attempted to define the papyrus usage in the Berlin Philol. Wochenschrift, 1902, p. 1467. He shows how the writers still follow the classical use in the repetition with article of a proper name which on its first introduction was anarthrous. When a man’s father’s or mother’s name is appended in the genitive, it normally has the article. There are very many cases where irregularities occur for which we have no explanation. See also Volker, Ῥ. 9, who notes the curious fact that the names of slaves and animals receive the article when mentioned the first time, where personalities that counted are named without the article. The innumerable papyrus parallels to Σαῦλος ὁ καὶ Παῦλος (Ac 13°) may just be alluded to before we pass from this subject: see Deissmann BS 313 ff., and Ramsay, CR xix. 429. . The position of the article is naturally Position of ᾿ Article. much affected by the colloquial character of NT language. In written style the ambi- guous position of εἰς τὸν θάνατον, Rom 64, would have been cleared up by prefixing tov, if the meaning was (as seems
Proper Names.
1 The marginal reading stood in the text in the First Revision. It is one among very many places where a conservative minority damaged the work by the operation of the two-thirds rule.
84 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
probable) “by this baptism into his death.” In most cases, there is no doubt as to whether the prepositional phrase belongs to the neighbouring noun. A very curious misplace- ment of the article occurs in the ὁ ὄχλος πολύς 1 of Jn 12°, As Sir R. C. Jebb notes on Sophocles, 07 1199 f., the noun and adjective may be fused into a composite idea; but Jebb’s exx. (like 1 Pet 118 and the cases cited in W. F. Moulton’s note, WM 166) illustrate only the addition of a second adjective after the group article-adjective-noun (cf OP 99 —i/a.D.—tijs ὑπαρχούσης αὐτῷ μητρικῆς οἰκίας τριστέγου).3 We cannot discuss here the problem of Tit 215, for we must, as grammarians, leave the matter open: see WM 162,156 n. But we might cite, for what they are worth, the papyri BU 366, 367, 368, 371, 395 (all vii/a.p.), which attest the translation “our great God and Saviour” as current among Greek-speaking Christians. The formula runs ἐν ὀνόματι τοῦ κυρίον καὶ δεσπότου ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν, καὶ τῆς δεσποΐνης ἡμῶν τῆς ἁγίας θεοτόκου, κτλ. A curious echo is found in the Ptolemaic formula applied to the deified kings: thus GH 15 (ii/B.c.), rod μεγάλου θεοῦ evep- yérou καὶ σωτῆρος [ἐπιφανοῦς] evyapiorov. The phrase here is, of course, applied to one person. One is not surprised to find that P. Wendland, at the end of his suggestive paper on Σωτήρ in ZNTW v. 335 ff, treats the rival rendering in Tit le. summarily as “an exegetical mistake,” like the severance of τοῦ Θεοῦ ἡμῶν and σωτῆρος I. X. in 2 Pet 13. Familiarity with the everlasting apotheosis that flaunts itself in the papyri and inscriptions of Ptolemaic and Imperial times, lends strong support to Wendland’s contention that Christians, from the latter part of i/a.D. onward, deliberately annexed for their Divine Master the phraseology that was impiously arrogated to themselves by some of the worst of men. Personal From the Article we turn to the Per- Pronouns:— sonal Pronouns. A very short excursion “Semitic here brings us up against another evidence Redundance.” of «the dependence of [NT] language on
1 If it is merely careless Greek, one may compare Par P 60? (ii/B.c. ?) ἀπὸ τῶν πληρωμάτων ἀρχαίων. (On the whole subject, see further p. 236.) 2 See note in CR xviii. 154a,
ADJECTIVES, PRONOUNS, PREPOSITIONS. 85
Semitic speech,” in the “extraordinary frequency of the oblique cases of the personal pronouns used without emphasis ” (Blass 164). Dependence on Semitic would surely need to be very strongly evidenced in other ways before we could readily accept such an account of elements affecting the whole fabric of everyday speech. Now a redundance of personal pronouns is just what we should expect in the colloquial style, to judge from what we hear in our own vernacular. (Cf Thumb, Hellen. 108 f.). A reader of the peti- tions and private letters in a collection of papyri would not notice any particular difference in this respect from the Greek of the NT. For example, in Par P 51 (ii/B.c.) we see an eminently redundant pronoun in ἀνύγω (=avoiyw) τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς μου. A specially good case is OP 299 (i/a.p.) Adpurove μυοθηρευτῇ ἔδωκα αὐτῷ... δραχμὰς n: the syntax is exactly that of Rev 27, etc. Kiéalker (Quest. 274) quotes διὸ καὶ πάλιν ἐπερρώσθησαν διὰ ταῦτα from Polybius, with other redundances of the kind. Such a line as this from a Klepht ballad (Abbott 42), |
καὶ στρίβει τὸ μουστάκι Tov, κλώθει Kal τὰ μαλλία του (“and he twirls his moustache and dresses his hair ”) illus- trates the survival of the old vernacular usage in MGr. In words like κεφαλή, where the context generally makes the ownership obvious, NT Greek often follows classical Greek and is content with the article. But such a passage as Mt 617, ἄλειψαί σου τὴν κεφαλήν, where the middle voice alone would suffice (cf p. 236), shows that the language already is learning to prefer the filler form. The strength of this tendency enhances the probability that in Jn 8° τοῦ πατρός is “the Father” and not “your father”: see Milligan-Moulton.
It is perhaps rather too readily taken for granted that the personal pronouns must always be emphatic when they appear in the nominative case. H. L. Ebeling (Gildersleeve Studies, p. 240) points out that there is no necessary emphasis in the Platonic ἦν 8 ἐγώ, ἔφην ἐγώ, as ov φῇς, etc.; and Gildersleeve himself observes (Synt. § 69): “The emphasis of the Ist and 2nd persons is not to be insisted on too much in poetry or in familiar prose. Notice the frequency of ἐγῴδα, ἐγῴμαι. Are we obliged then to see a special
Emphasis in Nominative.
86 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
Stress in the pronoun whenever it denotes the Master, like the Pythagorean αὐτὸς pa? We may perhaps better describe it as fairly represented to the eye by the capital in “He,” to the ear by the slower pronunciation which reverence likes to give when the pronoun refers to Christ. Generally the pronoun is unmistakably emphatic in nom., from Mt 151 onwards; but occasionally the force of the emphasis is not obvious—cf Lk 19% The question suggests itself whether we are compelled to explain the difficult σὺ εἶπας and the like (Mt 26% 274, Mk 152, Lk 22” 288, Jn 18%) by putting a stress on the pronoun. Can we drop this and translate, “You have said it,” ae. “That is right”? It is pointed out however by Thayer (JBL xiii. 40-49) that the πλήν in Mt 26 is not satisfied by making the phrase a mere equivalent of “Yes”—to mention only one of the passages where difficulties arise. We seem thrown back on Thayer's rendering “ You say it,” “the word is yours.”
There remains here the difficult question of the use of ἡμεῖς for ἐγώ The gram- marian’s part in this problem is happily a small one, and need detain us only briefly. K. Dick, in his elaborate study of the question,’ gives a few apposite examples from late Greek literature and from papyrus letters, which prove beyond all possible doubt that J and we chased each other throughout these documents without rhyme or reason. We may supplement his exx. with a few more references taken at random. See for example Tb P 58 (ii/B.c.), and AP 130 (i/a.v. —a most illiterate document): add Tb P 26 (ii/B.c.) ὄντι μοι ἐν Πτολεμαίδει. . . ἐπέπεσεν ἡμῖν, JHS xix. 92 (ii/a.p.) χαῖρέ μοι, μῆτερ γλυκυτάτη, Kal φροντίζετε ἡμῶν ὅσα ἐν νεκροῖς, and BU 449 (ii/iii a.D.) ἀκούσας ὅτε νωθρεύῃ ἀγωνιοῦμεν. Dick quotes as a particularly good ex. BU 27 (ii/iii a.p.), an interesting letter, reproduced with some notes in EHzpos. VI. ili. 270. He succeeds in showing—so Deissmann thinks— that every theory suggested for regularising Paul’s use of these pronouns breaks down entirely. It would seem that the question must be passed on from the grammarian to
Ἡμεῖς for ᾿Εγώ ?

1 Der schréftstellerische Plural bet Paulus (1900), pp. 18 ff. Sce also Deissmann’s summary of this book, Theol. Rundschaw v. 65. (*See p. 246.
ADJECTIVES, PRONOUNS, PREPOSITIONS. 87
the exegete; for our grammatical material gives us not the slightest evidence of any distinction between the two numbers in ordinary writing. It is futile to argue from Latin to Greek, or we might expect help from Prof. Conway’s careful study of nos in Cicero’s Letters;! but the tone of superiority, in various forms, which the nos carries, has no
parallel in Greek. | The reflexive pronouns have developed some unclassical uses, notably that in the plural they are all fused into the forms originally appropriated to the third person. The presence or absence of this confusion in the singular is a nice test of the degree of culture in a writer of Common Greek. In the papyri there are a few examples of it in very illiterate docu- ments,? while for the plural the use is general, beginning to appear even in classical times® This answers to what we find in the NT, where some seventy cases of the plural occur without a single genuine example of the singular;‘ late scribes, reflecting the developments of their own time, have introduced it into Jn 18% and Rom 13° (Gal 514). As in the papyri, ἑαυτούς sometimes stands for ἀλλήλους, and some- times is itself replaced by the personal pronoun. In translations from Semitic originals we may find, instead of ἑαυτόν, ἃ periphrasis with ψυχή; thus Lk 9%, compared with its presumed original Mk 8%. But this principle will have to be most carefully restricted to definitely translated passages ; and even there it would be truer to say that ἑαυτόν has been levelled up to τὴν ψυχὴν αὐτοῦ, than that ψυχή
has been emptied of meaning.
ὦ Behausted ” In one class of phrases ἑαυτοῦ is used fmeO an ἃ without emphasis,in a way that brings up the ἴδιος. discussion of its fellow ἴδιος, ὃ In sepulchral inscriptions we find a son describing his
Reflexive Pronoun.

1 Transactions of Cambridge Philological Society, V.i., 1899.
2 See CR xv. 441, xviii. 154. 1 find it rather hard to believe that Lucian’s text is sound where he is recorded as using this eminently illiterate idiom: 6.9. Dial. Marin. iv. 8.
8 Polybius always uses αὑτῶν (Kilker, Questiones, p. 277).
*In 1 Co 10” éavrof= “‘ one’s.”
5 See J. A. Robinson, Study of the Gospels, p. 114, on periphrases for the reflexive. [* See p. 246.
88 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
father as ὁ πατήρ, 6 ἴδιος πατήρ, or ὁ ἑαυτοῦ πατήρ, and the difference between the three is not very easily discernible. In a number of these inscriptions contained in vol. iii. of the IMA I count 21 exx. with ἴδιος, 10 with ἑαυτοῦ, and 16 with neither. The papyrus formula used in all legal documents where a woman is the principal, viz. μετὰ κυρίου τοῦ ἑαυτῆς ἀνδρός (ἀδελφοῦ, etc.), gives a parallel for this rather faded use of the reflexive. It starts the more serious question whether ἴδιος is to be supposed similarly weakened in Hellenistic. This is often affirmed, and is vouched for by no less an authority than Deissmann (BS 123 1) He calls special attention to such passages in the LXX as Job 24% (οἴκων ἰδίων), Prov 271 (τοῦ ἰδίον οἴκου), 9% (τοῦ ἑαυτοῦ ἀμπελῶνος . . . τοῦ ἰδίου ryewpyiov), 227 (ἰδέοις δεσπόταις), in which the pronoun has nothing what- ever answering to it in the original. He reminds us that the “exhausted iévos” occurs in writers of the literary Κοινή, and that in Josephus even οἰκεῖος comes to share this weakening: a few Attic inscriptions from i/B.c. (Meisterhans® 235) show ἔδιος with the like attenuated content. Our inference must be that in Ac 24” Luke is not ironically suggesting the poverty of Felix’s title, and that in Mt 225 there is no stress on the disloyal guest’s busying himself with his own farm instead of someone else’s. (Cf p. 237 below.) Perhaps, however, this doctrine of the exhausted ἴδιος is in some danger of being worked too hard. In CR xv. 440 ἢ are put down all the occurrences of ἔδιος in BU vols. i. and ii, which contain nearly 700 documents of various antiquity. It is certainly remarkable that in all these passages there is not one which goes to. swell Deissmann’s list. Not even in the Byzantine papyri have we a single case where iévos is not exactly represented by the English own. In a papyrus as early as the Ptolemaic period we find the possessive pronoun added—évra ἡμῶν ἴδιον, which is just like “our own.” (Cf 2 Pet 316 Tit 1%, Ac 28) This use became normal in the Byzantine age, in which ἔδιος still had force enough to make such phrases as ἐδίαν καὶ νομίμην γυναῖκα. Now, in the face of the literary examples, we cannot venture to deny in toto the weakening of ἴδιος, still less the practical equivalence of iévos and ἑαυτοῦ, which

ADJECTIVES, PRONOUNS, PREPOSITIONS. 89
is evident from the sepulchral inscriptions above cited, as well as from such passages as Prov 912 and 1 Co 7% But the strong signs of life in the word throughout the papyri have to be allowed for.
In correlating these perplexing phenomena, we may bring in the following considerations:—(1) The fact that Josephus similarly weakens otxeios seems to show that the question turns on thought rather than on words. (2) It is possible, as our own language shows, for a word to be simultaneously in possession of a full and an attenuated meaning. People who say “It’s an awful nuisance,” will without any sense of incongruity say “How awful!” when they read of some great catastrophe in the newspaper. No doubt the habitual light use of such words does tend in time to attenuate their content, but even this rule is not universal. “To annoy” is in Hellenistic σκύλλειν, 2 and in modern French géner. There was a time when the Greek in thus speaking compared his trouble to the pains of flaying alive, when the Frenchman recalled the thought of Gehenna ; but the original full sense was unknown to the unlearned speaker of a later day. Sometimes, however, the full sense lives on, and even succeeds in ousting the lighter sense, as in our word vast, the adverb of which is now rarely heard as ἃ mere synonym of very. (3) The use of the English own will help us somewhat. “Let each man be fully assured in his own mind” (Rom 14°) has the double advantage of being the English of our daily speech and of representing literally the original ἐν τῷ ἰδίῳ vol. What function has the adjective there? It is not, as normally, an emphatic assertion of property: I am in no danger.of being assured in someone else’s mind. It is simply a method of laying stress on the personal pronoun: ἐν τῷ νοΐ and “in his mind” alike transfer the stress to the noun.” This fact at once shows the equivalence of ἔδιος and ἑαυτοῦ in certain locutions. Now, when we look at the examples of “ exhausted ἴδιος, we find that they very largely are attached to words that imply some sort of belonging. Husband and wife account for seven examples in the NT, and other relation-
1 Cf p. 237 below. 2 See Hapos. vi. iii. 273 f. [5 See p. 246.
90 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
ships, including that of master and slave, for a good many more. A large number come under the category of the mind, thoughts and passions, and parts of the body. House, estate, riding-animal, country or language, and similar very intimate possessions receive the epithet. If occasionally this sense of property is expressed where we should not express it, this need not compromise the assertion that ἴδιος itself was always as strong as our English word own. There are a host of places in the NT, as in the papyri, where its emphasis is undeniable; ¢g. Mt 91, Lk 6“, Jn 1* (note its position) 5 etc., Ac 1%, 1 Co 38, Gal 65, Heb 7%, and many others equally decisive. One feels therefore quite justified in adopting the argument of Westcott, Miulligan- Moulton, etc., that the emphatic position of τὸν ἴδιον in Jn 14 - was meant as a hint that the unnamed companion of Andrew, presumably John, fetched his brother. What to do in such cases as Ac 245: and Mt 22°, is not easy to say. The Revisers insert own in the latter place; and it is fair to argue that the word suggests the strength of the counter-attraction, which is more fully expressed in the companion parable, Lk 1418 The case of Drusilla is less easy. It 18. hardly enough to plead that ἴδιος is customarily attached to the relationship; for (with the Revisers) we instinctively feel that own is appropriate in 1 Pet 3! and similar passages, but inappropriate here. It is the only NT passage where there is any real difficulty; and since B stands almost alone in reading ἐδίᾳ, the temptation for once to prefer & is very strong. The error may have arisen simply from the common- ness of the combination ἡ idia γυνή, which was here trans- ferred to a context in which it was not at home.
Before leaving ἴδιος something should be said about the use of ὁ ἴδιος without a noun expressed. This occurs in Jn 1" 131, Ac 4% 2423 In the papyri we find the singular used thus as a term of endearment to near relations: eg. ὁ δεῖνα τῷ ἰδίῳ χαίρειν. In Expos. VI. iii. 277 I ventured to cite this as a possible encouragement to those (including B. Weiss) who would translate Ac 20% “the blood of one who was his own.” Mt 27%, according to the text of δὲ], and the later authorities, will supply a parallel for the grammatical
Ὃ ἴδιος.
ADJECTIVES, PRONOUNS, PREPOSITIONS. 91
ambiguity: there as here we have to decide whether the second genitive is an adjective qualifying the first or a noun dependent on it. The MGr use of ὁ ἔδιος, as substitute for the old ὁ αὐτός, has nothing foreshadowing it in the NT; but in the papyrus of Eudoxus (ii/B.c.) we find a passage where τῆι ἰδίαι is followed by τῆι αὐτῆι in the same sense, so that it seems inevitable to trace, with Blass, an anti- cipation of MGr here. Perhaps the use was locally restricted. τς There is an apparent weakening of Αὐτὸς ὁ and a \ ες oe . ὁ αὐτὸς. autos ὁ in Hellenistic, which tends to blunt the distinction between this and ἐκεῖνος 6. Dean Robinson (Gospels, Ὁ. 106) translates Lk 1074 “in that hour” (Mt 11% ἐν ἐκείνῳ τῷ καιρῷ), and so Lk 12:2 (Mk 181 ἐκείνῃ), and 10%. It is difficult to be satisfied with “John himself” in Mt 3*; and in Luke particularly we feel that the pronoun means little more than “that.” Outside Luke, and the one passage of Mt, αὐτὸς ὁ has manifestly its full classical force. From the papyri we may quote OP 745 (i/a.D.) αὐτὸν τὸν ’Avtay,“the said A.”: note also GH 26 (1 8.0.) 6 αὐτὸς “pos, “the same Horus,” 1.6. “the aforesaid,” and so in BU 1052 (i/Bc.). We find the former use in MGr, eg. αὐτὸ τὸ κρίμα, “this sin” (Abbott 184), etc. We have already seen (p. 86) that the emphatic αὐτὸς standing alone can replace classical ἐκεῖνος. (See now Wellh. 26 f.) . Turning to the Relatives, we note the Relatives :— limiti » . . Use of goris, limiting of ὅστις, a conspicuous trait of the | vernacular, where the nominative (with the neuter accusative) covers very nearly all the occurrences of the pronoun. The phrase ἕως ὅτου is the only exception in NT Greek. The obsolescence of the distinction between ὅς and ὅστις is asserted by Blass for Luke, but not for Paul. A type like Lk 24 εἰς πόλιν Δαυεὶδ ἥτις καλεῖται Βηθλεέμ, may be exactly paralleled from Herodotus (see Blass 173) and from papyri: so in an invitation formula αὔριον ἥτις ἐστὶν τε, “to-morrow, which is the 15th”—cf Mt 278. Hort, on 1 Pet 211: (Comm. p. 133), allows that “there are some places in the NT in which ὅστις cannot be distinguished from ds.” “In most places, however, of the NT,” he proceeds, “ὅστις apparently retains its strict classical force, either generic,
92 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
‘which, as other like things,’ or essential, ‘ which by its very nature.” A large number of the exceptions, especially in Lucan writings, seem to be by no means cases of equivalence between ὅς and ὅστις, whether agreeing or disagreeing with classical use. Some of them would have been expressed with ὅσπερ in Attic: thus in Ac 11% we seem to expect ἥπερ éyevero, Others throw a subtle stress on the relative, which can be brought out by various paraphrases, as in Lk 1”, “which for all that.” Or ὅστις represents what in English would be expressed by a demonstrative and a conjunction, as in Lk 1095, “and it shall not be taken away.” In Mt we find ὅστις used four times at the beginning of a parable, where, though the principal figure is formally described as an individual, he is really a type, and ὅστις is therefore appropriate. We may refer to Blass 173, for examples of ὅς used for ὅστις, with indefinite reference. The large number of places in which ὅστις is obviously right, according to classical use, may fairly stand as proof that the distinction is not yet dead. We must not stay to trace the distinction further here, but may venture on the assertion that the two relatives are never absolutely convertible, however blurred may be the outlines of the classical distinction in Luke, and possibly in sporadic passages outside his writings. Kalker (Quest. 245 1.) asserts that Polybius uses ὅστις for ὅς before words beginning with a vowel, for no more serious reason than the avoidance of hiatus; and it is curious that among twenty-three more or less unclassical examples in the Lucan books fourteen do happen to achieve this result. We chronicle this fact as in duty bound, but without suggesting any inclination to regard it as a key to our problem. If Kalker is right for Polybius—and there certainly seems weight in his remark that this substitution occurs just where the forms of ὅς end in a vowel—we may have to admit that the distinction during the Κοινή period had worn rather thin. It would be like the distinction between our relatives who and that, which in a considerable proportion of sentences are sufficiently convertible to be selected mostly according to our sense of rhythm or euphony: this, however, does not imply that the distinction is even blurred, much less lost. The attraction of the Relative—which, of course, does
‘ADJECTIVES, PRONOUNS, PREPOSITIONS. 93
not involve oorus—is a construction at least as popular in late as in classical Greek. It appears abundantly in the papyri, even in the most illiterate of them; and in legal documents we have the principle stretched further in formule, such as dpovpav δέκα δύο ἢ ὅσων ἐὰν wow οὐσῶν. There are to be noted some exceptions to the general rule of attraction, on which see Blass 173. In several cases of alleged breach of rule we may more probably (with Blass) recognise the implied presence of the “internal accusative”: so in 2 Co 14, Eph 16 41, where Dr Plummer (067, 2 Co Lc.) would make the dative the original case for the relative.
Confusion of relative and indirect inter- Relatives and joostive is not uncommon. “Ὅσος, οἷος, Interrogatives .°, ,ς., . er
confused. οποῖος, ἡλίκος occur in the NT as indirect interrogatives, and also—with the exception
of ἡλίκος----ἃ8 relatives,” W. F. Moulton observes (WM 210n.); and in the papyri even ὅς can be used in an indirect question. Good examples are found in Par P 60 (ii/B.c.) ἀπόστιλόν μοι πόσον ἔχει παρά σου X. καὶ [ἀφ᾽ οὗ χρόνου, and RL 29 (iii/B.c.) φράζοντες [τό τε] αὐτῶν ὄνομα καὶ ἐν ἧι κώμηι οἰκοῦσιν καὶ π[όσου τιμῶν]ται. So already in Sophocles, Antig. 542, OT 1068 (see Jebb’s notes); and in Plato, Huth. 148 ἃ μὲν yap διδόασιν, παντὶ δῆλον. It is superfluous to say that this usage cannot possibly be extended to direct question, so as to justify the AV in Mt 26°, The more illiterate papyri and inscrip- tions show τίς for relative ὅστις not infrequently, as εὗρον yeopyov τίς αὐτὰ ἑλκύσῃ.----τίνος ἐὰν χρίαν ἔχῃς----τίς ἂν κακῶς ποιήσει, etc. Jebb on Soph. ΟΤ' 1141 remarks that while “ τίς in Classical Greek can replace ὅστις only where there is an indirect question, . . . Hellenistic Greek did not always observe this rule: Mk 1488.» There is no adequate reason for punctuating Jas 318 so as to bring in this misuse of τίς. But Mt 10 and Lk 178 are essentially similar;? nor does there seem to be any decisive reason against so reading Ac 13%, Dieterich (Unters. 200) gives several inscriptional exx., and observes that the use was specially strong in Asia
Attraction.
1 BU 822 (iii/a.p.), BM 289 (iv/a.p.), JHS xix. 299. 31 must retract the denial I gave in CR xv 441.
94 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
Minor. It is interesting therefore to note Thumb’s statement (TALZ xxviii. 423), that the interrogative is similarly used in Pontic now—a clear case of local survival. The NT use of ὅτι for τί in a direct question is a curious example of the confusion between the two categories, a confusion much further developed in our own language. MGr developments are instructive when Deven nts we are examining the relatives and inter- rogatives. The normal relative is ποῦ, fol- lowed by the proper case of the demonstrative, as ὁ γιατρὸς ποῦ τὸν ἔστειλα, “the doctor whom I sent,” ete. The ingenious Abbé Viteau discovers a construction very much like this, though he does not draw the parallel, in Jn 911 ὅτι ἠνέῳξέν σου τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς, “thou whose eyes he hath opened”: he cites Mk 611: 8% as further exx. Since 6 τί and Wt are passable equivalents, we have here a “ pure Hebraism ”—a gem of the first water! We might better Viteau’s instruction by tracing to the same fertile source the MGr idiom, supporting our case with a reference to Jannaris HG ὃ 1439, on MGr parallels to Mk 755 (js... αὐτῆς) and the like! It will be wise however for us to sober ourselves with a glance at Thumb’s remarks, Hellen, 130, after which we may proceed to look for parallels nearer home than Hebrew. In Old English this was the regular con- struction. Thus, “thurh God, ¢he ic thurh Ais willan hider dsend wes” (Gen 45°); “namely oon That with a spere was thirled Ais brest-boon” (Chaucer, Knightes Tale 1851 f.). Cf the German “der du bist” =who art. The idiom is still among us; and Mrs Gamp, remarking “which her name is Mrs Harris,” will hardly be suspected of Hebraism ! The presence of a usage in MGr affords an almost decisive disproof of Semitism in the Kovw), only one small corner of whose domain came within range of Semitic influences ; and we have merely to recognise afresh the ease with which identical idioms may arise in totally independent languages. It does not however follow that Blass is wrong when he claims
1 See below, p. 237; also Wellh. 22, who adds exx. from D. 2 See Skeat’s Chaucer, Prologue and Knightes Tale, p. xxxvi. I owe the sug- gestion to my friend Mr E. E. Kellett.
ADJECTIVES, PRONOUNS, PREPOSITIONS. 95
Mk 755 17 1819. Lk 336 and passages in Rev, as “ specially suggested by Semitic usage.” The phenomenon is frequent in the LXX (see WM 185), and the NT exx. are all from places where Aramaic sources are certain or suspected. A vernacular use may be stretched (cf pp. 10 f.) beyond its natural limits, when convenient for literal translation. But Blass’s own quotation, οὗ ἡ πνοὴ αὑτοῦ ἐν ἡμῖν éotiv; comes from a piece of free Greek. That this use did exist in the old vernacular, away from any Semitic influence, is proved by the papyri (p. 85). The quotations in Kiihner-Gerth § 561 n2, and in Blass and Winer li.cc., show that it had its roots in the classical language. As was natural in a usage which started from anacoluthon, the relative and the pleonastic demonstrative were generally, in the earlier examples, separated by a good many intervening words.
The modern Interrogative is mostly ποιός, for tis has practically worn down to the indeclinable τέ, just as our what (historically identical with the Latin guod) has become indifferent in gender. The NT decidedly shows the early stages of this extension of motos. It will not do for us to refine too much on the distinction between the two pronouns. The weakening of the special sense of ποῖος called into being a new pronoun to express the sense gualis, namely, ποταπός, which was the old ποδαπός (“ of what country ?”), modified by popular etymology to suggest πότε, and thus denuded of its associa- tion in meaning with ἀλλοδ-απός, ἡμεδ-απός, and ὑμεδ-απός.3
3 We take next the Numerals. The use
Numerals :— . . εἷς as ordinal; οἷ els as an ordinal is “undoubtedly a Hebrew idiom,” according to Blass, p, 144. Our doubts, nevertheless, will not be repressed; and they are encouraged by the query in Thumb’s review. To begin with, why did the Hebraism affect only the first numeral, and not its successors? If the use was vernacular Greek, the reason of the restriction is obvious: πρῶτος is the only ordinal which altogether differs in form from the
1Clement ad Cor. 21 jin. (Lightfoot, p. 78). Nestle (ΖΝ ΤῊ i. 178 ff.) thinks the writer was of Semitic birth.
2 The suffix is that of Latin prop-inquos, long-inquos, Skt. anv-afic, ete. : ποδ- and ἀλλοδ- are quod, what, aliud, while ἡμεδ-, ὑμεδ-, answer to ablative forms in Skt.
96 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
cardinal. When we add that both German and English say “nage forty” (WM 311), we are prepared for the belief that the Greek vernacular also had this natural use. Now, although els καὶ εἰκοστός, unus et vicesimus, one and twentieth, are (as Blass says) essentially different, since the ordinal element is present at the end of the phrase, this is not so with τῇ μιᾷ καὶ εἰκάδι" BU 623 (ii/iii a.). But the matter is really settled by the fact that in MGr the cardinals beyond 4 have ousted the ordinals entirely (Thumb, Handbuch 56); and Dieterich (Unters. 187 f.) shows from inscriptions that the use is as old as Byzantine Greek. It would seem then that the encroach- ment of the cardinal began in the one case where the ordinal was entirely distinct in form, spread thence over other numerals, and was finally repelled from the first four, in which constant use preserved alike the declension and the distinct ordinal form. Had Semitic influence been at work, there is no conceivable reason why we should not have had τῇ πέντε at the same time. Simultaneously with this process we note oo. . the firm establishment of simplified ordinals oF the teona: from 13th to 19th, which now (from iii/B.c. onwards) are exclusively of the form τρίσκαι-
δέκατος, τεσσαρεσκαιδέκατος, etc., with only isolated exceptions. Similarly we find δέκα τρεῖς, δέκα ἕξ, etc., almost invariably in papyri, and δέκα δύο more often than dedexa.2* These pheno- mena all started in the classical period: cf Meisterhans® 160. There is a further use of els which calls
εἷς as Indefinite , Κ its devel t int ‘ndefinit Article. or remark, its development into an indefinite article, like eon in German, wn in French, or our own an: in MGr the process is complete. The fact that
1 Δεύτερος is not derived from δύο, but popular etymology would naturally connect them. Curiously enough, Hebrew shares the peculiarity noted above, which somewhat weakens our argument: Aramaic, like Latin and English, uses a word distinct from the cardinal for second as well as first. Hebrew has lost all ordinals beyond 10, and Aramaic shows them only in the Jerus. Targ. See Dalman, Gramm. 99f. For days of the month, the encroachment of cardinals has gone farther still in both dialects. The fact that the ordinals up to 10 are all treated alike in Hebrew, reinforces our view.
2 Elxds, like τριάς, δεκάς, τριακάς, etc., was originally either No. 20 or a set of 20, though used only for the 20th of the month. Cf τριάς in Philo=3rd day (LS), and τετράς, the usual name for Wednesday, surviving in MGr: see p, 287.
ὃ Wellhausen notes that D has only δέκα δύο and ¢f. [* See p. 246.
ADJECTIVES, PRONOUNS, PREPOSITIONS. 97
els progressively ousted tis in popular speech, and that even in classical Greek there was a use which only needed a little diluting to make it essentially the same,' is surely enough to prove that the development lay entirely within the Greek language, and only by accident agrees with Semitic. (See Wellh. 27.) We must not therefore follow Meyer (on Mt 819), in denying that els is ever used in the NT in the sense of τις : it is dangerous to import exegetical subtleties into the NT, against the known history of the Common Greek. The use of ὁ εἷς in Mk 14! ig, as noted in Expos. VI. vii. 111, paralleled in early papyri?
In Blass’s second edition (p. 330) we find a virtual sur- render of the Hebraism in δύο δύο, συμπόσια συμπόσια (Mk 6°), δεσμὰς δεσμάς (Mt 13% in Epiphanius—a very probable reading, as accounting for the variants): he remarks on μίαν μίαν in Sophocles (Frag. 201) that “ Atticists had evidently complained of it as vulgar, and it was not only Jewish-Greek.” Winer compared Aeschylus Perse 981, μυρία μυρία πεμπαστάν. Deissmann (T7ALZ, 1898, p. 631) cites δήσῃ τρία τρία from OP 121 (4.0. ; and (as W. F. Moulton noted WM 312 n.) the usage is found in MGr. Thumb is undeniably right in calling the coincidence with Hebrew a mere accident. In the papyri (eg. Tb P 635—ii/B.c.) the repetition of an adjective produces an elative = μεγάλου μεγάλου = μεγίστου. It should be added that in Lk 10! we have a mixed distributive ἀνὰ δύο δύο (B al): so in Lv. Petr. 35, as Blass notes, and Acta Philip 92 (Tisch.).4
‘* Noah the eighth person.
ὁ εἷς.
Distributives.
Two single passages claim a word before » we pass on from the numerals. ᾿Ογδοον Noe ἐφύλαξεν in 2 Pet 2° presents us with
1 It is difficult to see any difference between εἷς and ris in Aristophanes, Av, 1292 ---- πέρδιξ μὲν els κάπηλος ὠνομάζετο χωλός, Μενίππῳ δ᾽ ἣν χελιδὼν τοὔνομα, κ.τ.λ.
From the papyri we may cite as exx. AP 80 (ii/B.c.) Κονδύλου ἑνὸς τῶν ἁλιείων (sc. προσκληθέντορ) ; BU 1044 (iv/a.p.) vos (ste= els) λεγόμενον (= -os) Φαῆσις.
2 We may add good exx. from Par P 15 (ii/B.c.) τὸν ἕνα αὐτῶν ὯΩρον---τοῦ ἑνὸς τῶν ἐγκαλουμένων Νεχουθοῦ.
8 Thumb, Hellen. 128, Handbuch 57.
*See W. Schulze, Graeca Latina 13. Add now Wellh. 31.
7
e
98 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
a classical idiom which can be shown to survive at any rate in literary Common Greek: see exx. in WM 312, and Schefer lc. I have not noticed any occurrences in the papyri, and in 2 Pet we rather expect bookish phrases. The AV of this passage is an instructive illustration for our inquiries as to Hebraisms. “ Noah the eighth person” is not English, for all its appearing in a work which we are taught to regard as the impeccable standard of classic purity. It is a piece of “translation English,” and tolerably unintelligible too, one may well suppose, to its less educated readers. Now, if this specimen of translators’ “nodding” had made its way into the language—like the misprint “strain αὐ a gnat”—we should have had a fair parallel for “Hebraism” as hitherto understood. As it stands, a phrase which no one has ever thought of imitating, it serves to illustrate the over-literal translations which appear very frequently in the LXX and in the NT, where a Semitic original -underlies the Greek text. (Compare what is said of Gallicisms in English on p. 13.) ᾿ Last in this division comes a note on Beventy ἃ times it 18%, Blass ignores entirely the ren- dering “seventy-seven times” (RVmargin), despite the fact that this meaning is unmistakable in Gen 453 (LXX). It will surely be felt that W. F. Moulton (WM 314) was right in regarding that passage as decisive. A definite allusion to the Genesis story is highly probable: Jesus pointedly sets against the natural man’s craving for seventy-sevenfold revenge the spiritual man’s ambition to exercise the privilege of seventy-sevenfold forgiveness. For a partial grammatical parallel see Iliad xxii. 349, δεκάκις [re] καὶ Fetxoot, “tenfold and twenty-fold,” if the text is sound. It will be worth while to give statistics Propositions ‘— for the relative frequency of Prepositions in Frequency, the NT, answering to those cited from Helbing (above, pp. 62 1.) for the classical and post- classical historians. If we represent ἐν by unity, the order of precedence works out thus:—eis *64, ἐκ ‘34, ἐπί "32, πρός 25, Sid °24, ἀπό "24, κατά ‘17, pera "17, περί 12, ὑπό 08, παρά ‘07, ὑπέρ (054, σύν 048, πρό 18, ἀντί 008, ἀνά ‘0045. We shall have to return later to prepositions compounded with verbs, following our present principle of
ADJECTIVES, PRONOUNS, PREPOSITIONS. 99
dealing with them in connexion with the parts of speech with which they are used. A few miscellaneous matters come in best at this point. First let us notice the pro- " minence in Hellenistic of combinations of Prepositions prepositions with adverbs. In papyri we joined with Adverbs, find such as ἐκ tore; OP 486 (ii/a.D.), ἀπὸ πέρυσι (Deissmann BS 221), and even ἀφ᾽ ὅτε ἐλουσάμην, “since I last bathed,” OP 528 (ii/a.p.). In NT we have ἀπὸ τότε, ἀπὸ πέρυσι, ἀπ’ ἄρτι, ἐκ πάλαι, ἐφ᾽ ἅπαξ, ἐπὶ τρίς, etc. The roots of the usage may be seen in the classical és det and the like. Some of these combinations became fixed, as ὑποκάτω, ὑπεράνω, κατέναντι. This may be set beside the abundance of “Improper” prepositions. All of these, except ἐγγύς, take the genitive only. Thumb comments! on the survival of such as ἕως, ἐπάνω, ὀπίσω, ὑποκάτω, in MGr. Hebraism in this field was supposed to have been responsible for the coining of ἐνώπιον, till Deiss- mann proved it vernacular.2 The compound preposition ἀνὰ μέσον was similarly aspersed ; but it has turned up abundantly in the papyri,—not however in any use which would help 1 Co 65°, where it is almost impossible to believe the text sound. (An exact parallel occurs in the Atheneum for Jan. 14, 1905, where a writer is properly censured for saying, “T have attempted to discriminate between those which are well authenticated,” 6. (presumably) “{and those which are not].” It is hard to believe Paul would have been so slovenly in writing, or even dictating.) We have a further set of “ Hebraisms ” in the compound prepositions which are freely made with πρόσωπον, χείρ and στόμα (Blass 129f.): see above, p. 81. Even here the Semitism is still on the familiar lines: a phrase which is possible in native Greek is extended widely beyond its idiomatic limits because it translates exactly a common Hebrew locution; and the conscious use of Biblical turns of speech explains the appli- cation of such phrases on the lips of men whose minds are saturated with the sacred writers’ language. As early 88 iii/B.c.,
1 ΤᾺ 1.2 xxviii. 422.
3 85.218. Cf Hxpos. vi. iii. 113: add now OP 658 (iii/a.p.), where it appears in the formula of a libelius. Tbh P 14 (114 B.c.) παρηγγελκότες ἐνώπιον, ‘I gave notice in person,” is the earliest ex. I have seen. But see p. 246.
100 .Α GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
in a Libyan’s will, we meet with κατὰ πρόσωπόν τινος .1 and in mercantile language we constantly find the formula διὰ χειρός, used absolutely, it is true—eg. MP 25 (iii/B.c.), “from hand to hand,” as contrasted with “through an intermediary.” We may refer to Heitmiiller’s proof? that the kindred phrase eis TO ὄνομά Tivos is good vernacular. The strong tendency to use compound prepositional phrases, which we have been illustrating already, would make it all the easier to develop these adaptations of familiar language.
The eighteen classical prepositions are, as we have just seen, all represented in NT Greek, except ἀμφί, which has disappeared as a separate word, like αηιδὲ in Latin, and like its correlative in English, the former existence of which in our own branch is shown by the survival of wm in modern German. It was not sufficiently differentiated from περί to assert itself in the competition; and the decay of the idea of duality weakened further a preposition which still proclaimed its original meaning, “on both sides,” by its resemblance to ἀμφότεροι. “Ava has escaped the same fate by its distributive use, which accounts for seven instances, the phrase ἀνὰ μέσον for four, and ἀνὰ μέρος for one. ’Avti occurs 22 times, but ἀνθ ὧν reduces the number of free occurrences to 17. Rare though it is, it retains its individuality. “In front of,” with a normal adnominal genitive, passes naturally into “in place of,” with the idea of equivalence or return or substitu- tion, our for. For the preposition in Jn 1156, an excellent parallel from Philo is given in WM (p. 456n.)2 Πρό occurs 48 times, including 9 exx. of πρὸ τοῦ ὁ. inf., which invades the province of πρίν. In Jn 12! we have πρὸ ἐξ ἡμερῶν τοῦ πάσχα, which looks extremely like ante diem tertium Kalendas. The plausible Latinism forces itself on our attention all the more when we compare [MA iii. 325 (ii/a.p.)
Prepositions with one case,
ΟἽ Deissmann BS 140.
3 Im Namen Jesu 100 ff. So p. 63, for ἐν ὀνόματι ὅτι, Mk 9%,
3 Blass compares γῆν πρὸ γῆς ἐλαύνεσθαι, “‘from one land to another,” ἑλπίσιν ἐξ ἐλπίδων, and the like (p. 124). The Philonic passage is from De Poster. Cainit ὃ 145 (p. 254 M.): διὸ ras πρώτας αἰεὶ χάριτας, πρὶν κορεσθέντα3 ἐξυβρίσαι τοὺς λαχόντας, ἐπισχὼν καὶ ταμιευσάμενος εἰσαῦθις ἑτέρας ἀντ᾽ ἐκείνων, καὶ τρίτας ἀντὶ τῶν δευτέρων καὶ αἰεὶ νέας ἀντὶ παλαιοτέρων. . . ἐπιδίδωσι,
ADJECTIVES PRONOUNS, PREPOSITIONS. 101
πρὸ ié Καλανδῶν Αὐγούστων, and parallels in translated documents to be seen in Viereck’s Sermo Grecus (see pp. 12, 13, 21, etc). And yet it is soon found that the same construction occurs in phrases which have nothing in common with the peculiar formula of Latin days of the month. In the Mysteries inscription from Andania (Michel 694, i/B.c.) we recognise it in Doric—mpo ἁμερᾶν δέκα τῶν μυστηρίων ; and the illiterate vernacular of FP 118 (ii/a..), πρὼ δύο ἡμερῶν ἀγόρασον τὰ ὀρνιθάρια τῆς εἱορτῆς (“ buy the fowls two days before the feast”), when combined with Jn dc., makes the hypothesis of Latinism utterly improbable. The second genitive in these three passages is best taken as an ablative— starting from the mysteries,” etc. It is found as early as Herodotus, who has (vi. 46) δευτέρῳ ἔτει τούτων, “ in the second year from these events”: cf also OP 492 (ii/a.D.) μετ’ ἐνιαυτὸν ἕνα τῆς τελευτῆς pov, “a year after (starting from) my death.” See also the note on ὀψέ, supr. p. 72. There remains the idiomatic use of πρό, seen in 2 Co 12? πρὸ ἐτῶν δεκατεσσάρων, “fourteen years before.” Blass (p. 127 n.) cites πρὸ ἁμερᾶν δέκα from the will of Epicteta (Michel 1001), written in the Doric of Thera, “end of iii/B.c. or beginning of ii/s.c., therefore pre-Roman”—+to cite Blass’s own testimony.! It becomes clear that historically the resem- blance between the ante diem idiom and the Greek which translates it is sheer coincidence, and the supposed Latinism goes into the same class as the Hebraisms we have so often disposed of already.” This enquiry, with the general con- siderations as to Latinisms which were advanced above (pp. 20 f.), will serve to encourage scepticism when we note the
1 Add FP 122 (i/ii A.p.), BU 592 (ii/a.p.), NP 47 (iii/a.p), Ch P 15 (iv/a.p.), BU 886 (vi/a.D.). |
2W. Schulze, Graec. Lat. 14-19, has a long and striking list of passages illustrating the usage in question, which shows how common it became. His earliest citation is πρὸ τριῶν ἡμερῶν τῆς τελευτῆς from Hippocrates (v/B.c.), which will go with that from Herodotus given above. We have accordingly both Ionic and Doric warrant for this Κοινή construction, dating from a period which makes Latin necessarily the borrower, were we bound to deny independent development. Schulze adds a parallel from Lithuanian! Our explanation of the dependent gen. as an ablative is supported by πρὸ μιᾶς ἡμέρας ἢ 6. ace. et inf, in OGIS 435 (ii/B.c.) and Jos. Ant. xiv. 317: 4 replaces the ablative genitive exactly as it does after comparatives.
102 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
resemblance of ὡς ἀπὸ σταδίων δεκαπέντε (Jn 1118) to a milli- bus passuum duobus (Blass 95). Blass cites Jn 218, Rev 14”, and the usage of Kowwy writers like Diodorus and Plutarch. Mutatis mutandis, this idiom is identical in principle with that just quoted for πρός After noting the translation-Hebraism φοβεῖσθαι aro in Mt 10% (= Lk 12*)} we proceed to observe the enlargement of the sphere of ἀπό, which encroaches upon ἐκ, ὑπό, and παρά.“ The title of the modern vernacular Gospels, “ μεταφρασμένη ἀπὸ τὸν ᾿Αλεξ. Πάλλη,᾽ reminds us that ἀπό has advanced further in the interval. Already in the NT it sometimes expressed the agent after passive verbs (eg. Lk 8*), where it is quite unnecessary to resort to refinements unless the usage of a particular writer demands them. The alleged Hebraism in καθαρὸς ἀπό is dispelled by Deissmann’s quotations, BS 196. The use of prepositions, where earlier Greek would have been content with a simple case, enables ἐκ in NT to outnumber ἀπό still, though obsolete to-day,’ except in the Epirot dy or ὀχ Thus ἀπό is used to express the partitive sense, and to replace the genitive of material (as Mt 27% 3*); ἐκ can even make a partitive phrase capable of becoming subject of a sentence, as in Jn 1617, For present purposes we need not pursue further the NT uses of ἀπό and ἐκ, which may be sought in the lexicon; but we may quote two illustrative inscriptional passages with ἐκ. Letronne 190 and 198 have σωθεὶς ἐκ, “safe home from” (a place), which has affinity with Heb 5’; and ὑπάρχων θεὸς ἐκ θεοῦ καὶ θεᾶς, from the Rosetta stone (OGIS 90---ἰ18.6.}, will elucidate Phil 3°, if the reader of the Greek should, conceivably, fall into the misconceptions which so many English readers entertain. It gives us an unpleasant start to find the language of the Nicene Creed used centuries earlier of Ptolemy Epiphanes !*
We have already (pp. 62 £.) sketched the developments of
1 Were the active φοβεῖν still extant (below, p. 162), this might be taken as “440 not be panic-stricken by.” It is much like προσέχειν ἀπό, Lk 121.
2 Thus ὀχ τὸ βουνό, ““ from the hill,” occurs in a modern song, Abbott 128 f.
8 Epiphanes=-Avatar: the common translation ‘‘ illustrious” is no longer tenable. See Dittenberger’s note, OGJS i. p. 144. So this title also antici- pates the NT (ἐπιφάνεια). Cf what is said on Christian adaptations of heathen terms, above, p. 84. (On ἀπό see also below, p. 287.) [6 ὃ See p. 246.
8 ADJECTIVES, PRONOUNS, PREPOSITIONS. 103
εἰς, and need say no more of the single-case prepositions, with one very large exception.” The late Greek uses of ἐν would take too much space if discussed in
Further use8 fyi] here. It has b h a maid-of-
of ἐν. ull here. as become so much a maid-o
all-work that we cannot wonder at its ulti-
mate disappearance, as too indeterminate, Students of Pauline theology will not need to be reminded of Deissmann’s masterly monograph on “ The NT Formula ἐν Χριστῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ," with its careful investigation of LXX uses of ἐν, and proof of the originality of Paul’s use. But SH (on Rom 6") seem rightly to urge that the idea of the mystic indwelling originated with the Master’s own teaching: the actual phrase in Jn 15* may be determined by Pauline language, but in the original Aramaic teaching the thought may have been essentially present. While there are a good many NT uses of ἐν which may be paralleled in vernacular documents, there are others beside this one which cannot: in their case, however, analogy makes it highly improbable that the NT writers were innovating. If papyri have προβεβηκότες ἤδη τοῖς ἔτεσιν (TP 1—ii/B.c.), we need not assume Hebraism in Lk 1’ merely because the evangelist inserts ἐν: his faithful preservation of his source’s ἡμέραις is another matter. See pp. 61f. above. In Ac 714 (LXX) we have €y=“amounting to,’ from which that in Mk 48 ds does not greatly differ. This is precisely paralleled by BU 970 (ii/a.D.) προοῖκα ἐν δραχμαῖς ἐννακοσίαις, OP 724 (ii/a.D.) ἔσχες τὴν πρώτην δόσιν ἐν δραχμαῖς τεσσαράκοντα, BU 1060 ((Α.}.) ἱμάτια... ἐν... δραχμαῖς ἑκατόν (“to the value of”). The use in Eph 2" ἐν δόγμασιν, “ consisting in,” is akin to this. For ἐν τοῖς =“in the house of,’ as in Lk 2, we have RL 38? (iii/B.c.) ἐν τοῖς ᾿Απολλωνίου, ΤΌ P 12: (ii/B.c.) ἐν τοῖς ’Apevvéws “in A.’s office,’ OP 523 (ii/a.p.) ἐν τοῖς Κλαυδίου: cf Par P 49 (ii/B.c.) εἰς τὰ II pwrapyou καταλύσω, and even ἐν Tat” Qpov in Tb P 27. We have in official documents ἐν meaning “in the department of”: so Tb P 27 (ii/B.c.) τὸ ἐν αὐτῶι ὀφειλόμενον, 72 ἃς ἐν Mappet τοπογραμματεῖ, al, I do not recall an exact NT parallel, but 1 Co 62, εἰ ἐν ὑμῖν κρίνεται ὁ κόσμος, is not far away. We have another use of ἐν with a personal dative in 1 Co 144 “in my judgement”: possibly Jude! ἐν Θεῷ is akin to this, Such uses would answer to παρά c. dat. in classical Greek
@See p. 246.
8 104 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
The last might seem to be expressed more naturally by the “dative of person judging” (like Ac 739 ἀστεῖος τῷ Θεῷ, or 1 Co le. ἔσομαι τῷ λαλοῦντε βάρβαρος). But the earliest uses of dative and locative have some common ground, which is indeed the leading cause of their syncretism. Thus we find loc. in Sanskrit used quite often for the dat. of indirect object after verbs of speaking. How readily ἐν was added to the dative, which in older Greek would have needed no preposi- where “more ... by one aroura” is expressed by ἐν. This particular dative is an instrumental—the same case as our “the more the merrier ”—, and is therefore parallel to that of ἐν μαχαίρῃ, “armed with a sword,” which we have already mentioned (pp. 12,61). We may fairly claim that “ Hebraistic” év is by this time reduced within tolerably narrow limits. One further ἐν may be noted for its difficulty, and for its bearing on Synoptic questions,—the ὁμολογεῖν ἔν τινε which is common to Mt 1055 and Lk 12°: this is among the clearest evidences of essentially identical translations used in Mt and Lk. W. F. Moulton (WM 283 n.) cites, apparently with approval, Godet’s explanation—“ the repose of faith ὧν Him whom it confesses”: so Westcott, quoting Heracleon, who originated this view (Canon® 305 n.). Deissmann (Jn Christo 60) quotes Delitzsch’s Hebrew rendering ‘3 ΠῚ", and puts it with Mt 3” 9% 116 237}, as an example of a literal translation “mit dngstlicher, die hermeneutische fPedanterie nahelégender Pietét.” Dr Rendel Harris recalls the Grecised translation in Rev 35, and gives me Syriac parallels. On the whole, it seems best not to look for justification of this usagein Greek. The agreement of Mt and Lk, in a point where accidental coincidence is out of the question, remains the most important element in the whole matter, proving as it does that Luke did not use any knowledge of Aramaic so as to deal independently with the
translated Logia that came to him.! " Of the prepositions with two cases, διά Propositions and μετά show no signs of weakening their Cases ; hold on both; but κατά c. gen. and περί, ὑπέρ and ὑπό c. acc. distinctly fall behind.
1 Of the similar agreement as to φοβεῖσθαι ἀπό, above, p. 102.
ADJECTIVES, PRONOUNS, PREPOSITIONS. 105
We may give the statistics in proof. διά gen. 382, 800. 279; μετά gen. 361, acc. 100; κατά gen. 73, acc. 391; περί gen. 291, acc. 38; ὑπέρ gen. 126, acc. 19; ὑπό gen. 165, acc. 50. Comparing this list with that in a classical Greek grammar, we see that μετά, περί and ὑπό! have been detached from connexion with the dative—a fact in line with those noted above, pp. 62 ff. Turning to details, we find that κατά (like avd, Rev 21%) is used as an adverb distributively, as in τὸ xa@ εἷς or els κατὰ εἷς Mk 14”, [Jn] 89, Rom 125, The MGr καθείς or καθένας, “ each,” preserves this, which probably started from the stereotyping of τὸ καθ᾽ ἕνα, ὃν καθ᾽ ἕν, etc., declined by analogy: cf. ἔνδημος from ἐν δήμῳ (ὦν), or proconsul from pro consule. The enfeebling of the distinction between περί and ὑπέρ c. gen. is a matter of some importance in the NT, where these prepositions are used in well-known passages to describe the relation of the Redeemer to man or man’s sins. It is an evident fact that ὑπέρ is often a colourless “about,” as in 2 Co 8*: it is used, for example, scores of times in accounts, with the sense of our commercial “to.” This seems to show that its original fullness of content must not be presumed upon in theological definitions, although it may not have been wholly forgotten. The distinction between ἀντί and the more colourless ὑπέρ, in applying the metaphor of purchase, is well seen in Mk 10“ (= Mt 20%) λύτρον ἀντὶ πολλῶν, and the quotation of this logion in 1 Tim 26 ἀντίλυτρον ὑπὲρ πάντων Διά c. ace. retains its meaning “for the sake of,” “because of,’ distinct from the meaning “through,” “by the instrumentality of,” which belongs to the genitive. As early as MP 16 and 20 (iii/B.c.), we have ἵνα διὰ σὲ βασιλεῦ τοῦ δικαίου τύχω ; but if the humble petitioner had meant “through you,” he would have addressed the king as a mere medium of favour: referring to a sovereign power, the ordinary meaning “ because of you” is more appropriate. This applies exactly to Jn 657, So Rom 8539, where Winer's explanation is correct (p. 498). In much later Greek, as Hatzidakis shows (p. 213)
1 For ὑπό c. dat. can be quoted OGIS 54 (iii/B.c.) ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτῶι ποιησάμενος, and OP 708 (as late as ii/A.D.) ἐκ τοῦ ὑπὸ σοὶ νομοῦ.
2 Note that δοὺς ἑαυτόν is substituted for the translation-Greek δοῦναι τὴν ψυχὴν αὐτοῦ : on this see above, p. 87. See further on ὑπέρ, p. 237.
106 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
διά c. acc, monopolised the field, which it still holds in MGr.! With the genitive, διά is often contrasted with ἐκ, ὑπό, etc., as denoting mediate and not original authorship, as 1 Co 8°, Mt 1%. In Heb 2” it is used of God, who is “the final Cause and the efficient Cause of all things” (Westcott). There seems no adequate reason for accepting Blass’s con- jectural emendation, δι ἀσθενείας, in Gal 435: “because of an illness” is an entirely satisfactory statement (see Lightfoot an loc.), and the Vulgate per is not strong enough to justify Blass’s confidence.® Mera c. gen. has in Lk 1% a use influenced by literal translation from Semitic.* Its relations with σύν are not what they were in Attic, but it remains very much the commoner way of saying with, Thumb points out (Hellen. 125) that MGr use disproves Hebraism in πολεμεῖν μετά τινος, Rev 127 al.’ Thus, for example, Abbott 44: πολέμησε μὲ τρεῖς χιλιάδες Τούρκους, “he fought with 3000 Turks.” . The category of prepositions used with and with . . ae three. three cases 1s hurrying towards extinction, as we should expect. Mera, περί and ὑπό have crossed the line into the two-case class; and in the NT πρός has nearly gone a step further, for its figures are e. gen. 1 (Ac 27%, literary), dat. 6 (=“ close to” or “at,” in Mk, Lk, Jn ter and Rev), acc. 679. With the dative, however, it occurs 104 times in LXX, and 23 times c. gen.: the decay seems to have been rapid. Cf however PFi 5 πρὸς τῷ πυλῶνι, a8 late as 245 A.D. For παρά the numbers are, c. gen. 78, dat. 50, acc. 60. Blass notes that c. dat. it is only used of persons, as generally in classical Greek, except in Jn 19%, One phrase with παρά calls for a note on its use in the papyri. Οἱ παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ is exceedingly common there to denote “his agents” or “representatives.” It has hitherto been less easy to find parallels for Mk 3%, where it must mean “his family”: see Swete and Field in loc. We can now cite GH 36 (ii/Bc.) of παρ᾽ ἡμῶν πάντες,
1 Contrast Ac 24? with OP 41 (iii/iv a.D.) πολλῶν ἀγαθῶν ἀπολαύομεν διὰ σαί.
3 Οὐ δυνάμενος δι’ ἀσθένειαν πλεῦσαι may be quoted from OP 726 (ii/a.p.), and a like phrase from OP 261 (i/A.D.), but of course they prove little or nothing. [5 366 pp. 246 f.; "see p. 247.
ADJECTIVES, PRONOUNS, PREPOSITIONS. 107
BU 998 (ii/B.c.), and Par P 36 (ii/B.c.). Finally we come to ἐπί, the only preposition which is still thoroughly at home with all the cases (gen. 216, dat. 176, acc. 464). The weakening of case-distinctions is shown however by the very disproportion of these figures, and by the confusion of meaning which is frequently arising. In Heb 810 1016 we construe καρδίας as acc. only because of ἐπὶ τὴν διάνοιαν which follows it in the latter passage: on the other hand, the original in Jer 31(38)* is singular, which favours taking it as genitive.” Our local upon can in fact be rendered by ἐπί with gen., dat., or acc., with comparatively little difference of force. Particular phrases are appropriated to the several cases, but the reason is not always obvious, though it may often be traced back to classical language, where distinctions were rather clearer. Among the current phrases we may note ἐπὶ τὸ αὐτό “together,” “in all,” often used in arithmetical statements: see Ac 1% 247, Blass? 330 might be read as suggesting comparative rarity for this phrase, which recurs scores of times. The common ἐφ᾽ ᾧ c. fut. indic. “on condition that,” does not appear in the NT. But with a pres. in 2 Co 5‘, and an aor. in Rom 5”, the meaning is essentially the same (“in view of the fact that”), allowing for the sense resulting from a jussive future.
1 Expos, Vi. vii. 118, viii. 486,
2 See also Mk 6° ἐπὶ τῷ χόρτῳ, where Mt 14” substitutes ἐπὶ τοῦ x., but with ἐπὶ τὸν xy. in D. In Ac 7™ Ὁ substitutes gen. for acc., and in 816 acc. for dat. In Eph 110 it seems difficult to draw any valid distinction between the cases of ἐπὶ τοῖς οὐρανοῖς and ἐπὶ τῆς ys. To add one further example, there seems no difference between ἐπ᾿ ἐσχάτου in Heb 1! and the dative in Tb P 69 (ii/B.0.), ὧν ἡ διοίκησις ἐπ ἐσχάτῳ τέτακται.
CHAPTER VI. THE VERB: TENSES AND MopeEs or ACTION.
Our first subject under the Verb will be one which has not yet achieved an entrance into the grammars. For the last few years the comparative philologists—mostly in Aue , Germany—have been busily investigating Aktionsart.” the problems of Aktionsart, on the “ kind of action” denoted by different verbal formations. The subject, complex in itself, has unfortunately been entangled not a little by inconsistent terminology ; but it must be studied by all who wish to understand the rationale of the use of the Tenses, and the extremely important part which Compound Verbs play in the Greek and other Indo-Germanic languages. The English student may be referred to pp. 477 ff. of Mr P. Giles’s admirable Manual of Comparative Philology, ed. 2. A fuller summary may be found in pp. 471 ff. of Karl Brug- mann’s Griech. Gramm., ed. 3, where the great philologist sets forth the results of Delbriick and other pioneers in compara- tive syntax, with an authority and lucidity all his own. ΝΞ The student of Hebrew will not need Conyugation telling that a Tense-system, dividing verbal Stems. action into the familiar categories of Past, Present and Future, is by no means 80 necessary to language as we once conceived it to be. It may be more of a surprise to be told that in our own family of languages Tense is proved by scientific inquiry to be relatively a late invention, so much so that the elementary distinction between Past and Present had only been developed to a rudimentary extent when the various branches of the family separated so that they ceased to be mutually intel- ligible. As the language then possessed no Passive whatever,
and no distinct Future, it will be realised that its resources 108
THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 109
needed not a little supplementing. But if they were scanty in one direction, they were superabundant in another. Brug- mann distinguishes no less than twenty-three conjugations, or present-stem classes, of which traces remain in Greek ; and there are others preserved in other languages. We must add the aorists and perfect as formations essentially parallel. In most of these we are able to detect an Aktionsart originally appropriate to the conjugation, though naturally blurred by later developments. It is seen that the Aorist has a “ punctiliar” action, that is, it regards action as a point: it represents the point of entrance (Jngressive, as βαλεῖν “let fly,” βασιλεῦσαι “come to the throne”), or that of completion (Hffective, as βαλεῖν “ hit”), or it looks at a whole action simply as having occurred, without distinguishing any steps in its progress (Constative? as βασιλεῦσαι “reign,” or as when a sculptor says of his statue, ἐποίησεν ὁ δεῖνα “X. made it”). On the same graph, the Constative will be a line reduced to a point by perspective. The Present has generally a durative action— “linear,” we may call it, to keep up the same graphic . illustration—as in βάλλειν “to be throw- Linear Action ; ing,” βασιλεύειν “to be on the throne.” The Perfect action is a variety by itself, denoting what began in the past and still continues: thus from the “point” root weido, “ discover, descry,” comes the primitive perfect οἶδα, “I discovered (εἶδον) and still enjoy the results,” «e “I know.” The present stems which show an t-reduplication (Sornpt, yéyvopac) are supposed to have started with an Iterative
Iterative . , ος Action. action, so that γίγνομαι would originally present the succession of moments which are
individually represented by ἐγενόμην. And so throughout the conjugations which are exclusively present. Other con- Jugations are capable of making both present and aorist
Point Action;
Action in Perspective ;
Perfect Action ;
1T venture to accept from a correspondent this new-coined word to represent the German punktuell, the English of which is preoccupied.
3 Unity of terminology demands our accepting this word from the German pioneers, and thus supplementing the stores of the New English Dictionary. Otherwise one would prefer the clearer word ‘‘summary.”’
110 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
stems, as ἔφην compared with ἔβην, γράφειν with τραπεῖν, στένειν with γενέσθαι. In these the pure verb-root is by nature either (a) “punctiliar,” (Ὁ) durative, or (c) capable of being both. Thus the root of ἐνεγκεῖν, like our bring, is essentially a “point” word, being classed as “Effective ”: accordingly it forms no present stem. That of φέρω, fero, bear, on the other hand, is essentially durative or “linear”, and therefore forms no aorist stem.! So with that of ἔστε, est, is, which has no aorist, while ἐγενόμην, as we have seen, had no durative present. An example of the third class is ἔχω, which (like our own ave) is ambiguous in its action. “1 had your money ” may mean either “I received it” (point action) or “I was in possession of it” (linear action). In Greek the present stem is regularly durative, “to hold,” while ἔσχον is a point word, “I received”: ἔσχον παρὰ σοῦ is, for instance, the normal expression in a papyrus receipt.2— Misappre- hension of the action-form of ἔχω is responsible for most of the pother about ἔχωμεν in Rom δ᾽. The durative present can only mean “let us enjoy the possession of peace”: (duxarw- θέντες) ἔσχομεν εἰρήνην is the unexpressed antecedent premiss ; and Paul wishes to urge his readers to remember and make full use of a privilege which they ex hypothes: possess from the moment of their justification. See p. 247. It is evident that this study of the kind Rationale of oF action denoted by the verbal root, and the Defective . . . Verbs. modification of that action produced by the formation of tense and conjugation stems, will have considerable influence upon our lexical treatment of the many verbs in which present and aorist are derived from different roots. ‘Opdw (cognate with our “ beware”) is very clearly durative wherever it accurs in the NT; and
᾿ 1 The new aorist (historically perfect) in the Germanic languages (our bore) has a constative action.
2\Note also a petition, Par P 22 (ii/s.c.), in which the tenses are carefully distinguished, as the erasure of an aorist in favour of the imperfect shows. Two women in the Serapeum at Memphis are complaining of their mother, who had deserted her husband for νὴ man: καὶ τοῦτο ποήσασα
οὐκ ἔσχε τὸ τῆς ἀδικησάσης πρόσωπον, ἀλλὰ συνηργάξατο ὡς ἐπανελεῖται αὐτὸν ὁ δηλούμένος, “she did not put on the face of the wrong-doer, but (her para- mour) began to intrigue with her to destroy (her husband).”
THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 111
we are at liberty to say that this root, which is incapable of forming an aorist, maintains its character in the perfect, “I have watched, continuously looked upon,” while ὄπωπα would be “I have caught sight of.” Εἶδον “I discovered,” and ὥφθην “I came before the eyes of,’ are obviously point- words, and can form no present. troy has a similar dis- ability, and we remember at once that its congeners () ἔπος, vox, Sanskrit vdc, etc., describe a single utterance: much the same is true of ἐρρέθην, and its cognate nouns (β) ῥῆμα, verbum, and word. On the other hand, λέγω, whose constative aorist ἔλεξα is replaced in ordinary language by eizroy, clearly denotes speech in progress, and the same feature is very marked in λόγος. The meaning of λόγος has been developed in post-Homeric times along lines similar to those on which the Latin sermo was produced from the purely physical verb sero. One more example we may give, as it leads to our remaining point. ᾿Εσθίω is very obviously durative: ὁ ἐσθίων per ἐμοῦ, Mk 1438, is “he who is taking a meal with me.” The root ed is so distinctly durative that it forms no aorist, but the punctiliar φαγεῖν (originally “to divide”) supplies the defect. It will be found that φαγεῖν in the NT is invariably constative:! it denotes simply the action of ἐσθίειν seen in perspective, and not either the beginning or the end of that action. But we find the compound κατεσθίειν,
oO etective καταφαγεῖν, used to express the completed Action. act, eating something till it is finished. How little the preposition’s proper meaning affects
the resulting sense is seen by the fact that what in Greek is κατεσθίειν and in Latin “devorare,” is in English “eat up” and in Latin also “comesse.” In all the Indo-Germanic Janguages, most conspicuously and systematically in the Slavonic but clearly enough in our own, this function of verb compounds may be seen. The choice of the preposition which is to produce this perfective action* depends upon conditions
1There is one apparent exception, Rev 1010, where ὅτε ἔφαγον αὐτό is ‘when I had eaten it up.” But ἔφαγον is simply the continuation of κατέφαγον (see below, p. 115). '
2One could wish that a term had been chosen which would not have suggested an echo of the tense-name. ‘‘Perfective action” has nothing whatever to do with the Perfect tense.
112 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
which vary with the meaning of the verbal root. Most of them are capable of “ perfectivising ” an imperfective verb, when the original adverb’s local sense has been sufficiently obscured. We may compare in English the meaning of bring and bring up, st and sit down, drive and drive away and drive home, knock and knock an and knock down, take and overtake and take over and betake, carry and carry off and carry through, work and work out and work off, fiddle and fiddle in (Tenny- son’s “ Amphion ”), set and se¢ back and set at and overset, see and see to, write and write off, hear and hear out, break and to-break (Judg 9588 AV), make and make over, wake and wake up, follow and follow up, come and come on, go and go round, shine and shine away (= dispel by shining). Among all the varieties of this list it will be seen that the compounded adverb in each case perfectivises the simplex, the combination denoting action which has accomplished a result, while the simplex denoted action in progress, or else momentary action to which no special result was assigned. In the above list are included many exx. in which the local force of the adverb is very far from being exhausted. Drive in, drive out, drive off, drive away, and drive home are alike perfective, but the goals attained are different according to the distinct sense of the adverbs. In a great many compounds the local force of the adverb is so strong that it leaves the action of the verb untouched. The separateness of adverb and verb in English, as in Homeric Greek, helps the adverb to retain its force longer than it did in Latin and later Greek. In both these languages many of the compound verbs have completely lost consciousness of the meaning originally borne by the prepositional element, which is accordingly confined to its perfectivising function. This is especially the case with com (con) and ex (e) in Latin, as in consequt “follow out, attain,” eficere “work out”;? and with amo, Sid, κατά and σύν in Greek, as in ἀποθανεῖν “die” (θνήσκειν “be dying”), διαφυγεῖν “escape” (φεύγειν = “flee”), καταδιώκειν “hunt down” (διώκω =“ pursue”),
1 ἐς Prepositions,” when compounded, are still the pure adverbs they were at the first, so that this accusative noun turned adverb is entirely on all fours with the rest. 2 See p. 237. _ [@See p. 247.
THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 113
κατεργάξεσθαι “work out,” συντηρεῖν “keep safe” (τηρεῖν = “watch”) An example may be brought in here to illustrate how this principle works in details of exegesis. In Lk 8” the true force of the pluperfect, combined with the vernacular usage of πολλοῖς χρόνοις (see p. 75), goes to show that the meaning is “it had long ago obtained and now kept complete mastery of him.” Συναρπάξω then, as the perfective of ἁρπάξω, denotes not the temporary paroxysm, but the establishment of a permanent hold. The inter- pretation of σύν here depends upon the obvious fact that its normal adverbial force is no longer at work. It is however always possible for the dormant σύν to awake, as a glance at this very word in LS will show. “Seize and carry away” is the common meaning, but in ξυναρπάσασαι Tas ἐμὰς εἶχον χέρας (Euripides Hec. 1163) we may recognise the original together. Probably the actual majority of compounds with these prepositions are debarred from the perfective.force by the persistency of the local meaning: in types like διαπορεύεσθαι, καταβαίνειν, συνέρχεσθαι, the pre- position is still very much alive. And though these three prepositions show the largest proportion of examples, there are others which on occasion can exhibit the perfectivising power. One is rather inclined to bring ἐπυγινώσκω under this category, and so take a middle course between the old view of Lightfoot and that recently propounded by Dean Robinson (EHphes. 248 ff.). The present simplex, γινώσκειν, is durative, “to be taking in knowledge.” The simplex aorist has point action, generally effective, meaning “ascertain, realise,” but occasionally (as in Jn 17%, 2 Tim 219) it is constative: ἔγνων oe gathers into one perspective all the successive moments of γινώσκωσι σέ in Jn 178, ᾿Επιγνῶναι, “find out, determine,”
- is rather more decisive than the γνῶναι (effective); but in
the present stem it seems to differ from γινώσκειν by includ- ing the goal in the picture of the journey there—it tells of knowledge already gained. Thus 1 Co 13” may be paraphrased, “ Now I am acquiring knowledge which is only partial at best: then I shall have learnt my lesson, shall know, as God in my mortal life knew me.”
The meaning of the Present-stem of these perfec- tivised roots naturally demands explanation. Since θνή-
8
114 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
oxew is “to be dying” and ἀποθανεῖν “to die,” what is there left for dro@vycxew? An analysis of the occur- rences of this stem in the NT will anticipate Present Stem = ome important points we shall have to make of perfectivised . . . Verbs. under the heading of Tenses. Putting aside the special use μέλλω ἀποθνήσκειν, we find the present stem used as an déerative in 1 Co 15*!, and as Frequentative in Heb 78 10%, 1 Co 15%, Rev 14:8: the latter describes action which recurs from time to time with different individuals, as the iterative describes action repeated by the same agent.2 In Jn 21% and 1 Co 15 it stands for a future, on which usage see p. 120. Only in Lk 85, 2 Co 6°, and Heb 117 is it strictly durative, replacing the now obsolete simplex O@vyoxw.2 The simplex, however, vanished only because the “linear perfective” expressed its meaning sufficiently, denoting as it does the whole process leading up to an attained goal. Katadevyew, for example, implies that the refuge is reached, but it depicts the journey there in a coup d'ail: καταφυγεῖν is only concerned with the moment of arrival, A very important example in the NT is the recurrent of ἀπολλύμενοι “the perishing.” Just as much as ἀποκτείνω and its passive ἀποθνήσκω, ἀπόλλυμαι * implies the completion of the process of destruction. When we speak of a “dying” man, we do not absolutely bar the possibility of a recovery, but our word implies death as the goal in sight. Similarly in the cry of the Prodigal, λιμῷ ἀπόλλυμαι, Lk 151”, and in that of the disciples in the storm, σῶσον, ἀπολλύμεθα, Mt 8535, we recognise in the perfective verb the sense of an inevitable doom, under the visible con- ditions, even though the subsequent story tells us it was averted. In οἱ ἀπολλύμενοι, 1 Co 118 al, strongly durative though the verb is, we see perfectivity in the fact that the goal is ¢deally reached: a complete transformation of its
1 Μέλλω c. pres. inf. comes eighty-four times in NT; c. fut. twice in Ac (u. ἔσεσθαι) ; 6. aor. six times (Ac 12°, Rom 818, Gal 8%, Rev 8? (ἀποθανεῖν) 316 12‘; also Lk 20% in Ὁ and Marcion).
2 Both will be (. . .), a series of points, on the graph hitherto used.
ὃ πέθνηκα is really the perfect of ἀποθνήσκω: a perfect needed no per- fectivising in a ‘‘ point-word ” like this.
‘Note that in 41} three the simplex is obsolete, for the same reason in each case,
THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 115
subjects is required to bring them out of the ruin implicit in their state.
Before passing on, we may note the survival in NT Greek of a classical idiom by which the preposition in a compound is omitted, without weakening the sense, when the verb is repeated. Thus in Euripides, Bacch. 1065, κατῆγον, ἦγον, ἦγον, answers to the English “pulled down, down, down.” I do not remember seeing this traced in the NT, but in Rev 10° (supra, p. 111 n.) ὄφαγον seems to be the continuation of κατέφαγον: in Jn 1” ἔλαβον takes up παρέλαβον, and in Rom 154 προεγράφη is repeated as ἐγράφη. So also épav- vavres 1 Pet 11%, ἐνδυσάμενοι 2 Co 53, and στῆναι Eph 6%. (It is just possible that ἤγεσθε in 1 Co 12? is similarly related to the ἀπαγόμενοι that follows, but its position makes serious difficulty.) In all these cases we are justified in treating the simplex as a full equivalent of the compound.
“The perfective Akitonsart in Polybius,”
Growth of the earliest of the great Κοινή writers, forms
Constative .
Aorist, the subject of an elaborate study by Dr
‘ Eleanor Purdie, in Jndog. Forsch. ix. 683-153 (1898). In a later volume, xii. 319-372, H. Meltzer con- troverts Miss Purdie’s results in detail; and an independent comparison with results derivable from NT Greek shows that her conclusions may need considerable qualification. Re- search in this field is, as Brugmann himself observes (Gricch. Gram 3 484), still in its initial stages; but that the Newnham philologist is on the right lines generally, is held by some of the best authorities, including Thumb, who thinks her thesis supported by MGr.” Her contention is that since Homer the aorist simplex had been progressively taking the constative colour, at the expense of its earlier punc-
tiliar character; and that there is a
μ Ptecive ,» growing tendency to use the compounds, Compounds. especially those with διά, κατά, and σύν, to express‘ what in the oldest Greek could be
sufficiently indicated by the simplex. To a certain extent the NT use agrees with that of Polybius. Thus φυγεῖν is constative eleven times, “to flee,” with no suggestion of the
prolongation of flight (φεύγειν) or of its successful accom- *See p. 247,
Preposition not repeated.
116 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
plishment (διαφυγεῖν or καταφυγεῖν). (It seems to me clear that in Heb 11* we have ἔφυγον for the beginning of action, —not the goal of safety attained, but the first and decisive step away from danger. Similarly in Mt 23 we should read “how are ye to flee from the judgement of Gehenna ? ”—just as in 3’, The thought is not of the inevitableness of God’s punishment, but of the stubbornness of men who will not take a step to escape it. The perfective therefore would be inap- propriate.) The papyri decidedly support this differentiation of simplex and compound. In the same way we find that διῶξαι is always constative in NT, while the perfective καταδιῶξαι, “hunt down,” occurs once in Mk 1%, where “followed after” (AV and RV) is not exact. ᾿Εργάσασθαι is certainly constative in Mt 25%, 3 ὅπ, and Heb 11%: it surveys in perspective the continuous labour which is so often expressed by ἐργάζεσθαι. In Mt 26, and even 2 Jn§, the same is probably the case: the stress lies on the actwity rather than on its product. This last idea is regularly denoted by the perfective compound with κατά. Φυλάξαι “guard” seems always constative, διαφυλάξαι “preserve” occurring in Lk 410. Similarly τηρῆσαι “watch, keep,” a continuous process seen in perspective: συν- and δια-τηρεῖν (present stem only) denote “watching” which succeeds up to the point of time contemplated. (See p. 237.) “AywvifecGar is only used in the durative present, but καταγωνίσασθαι (Heb 11%) is a good perfective. Φωγεῖν and καταφαγεῖν differ quite on Polybian lines (see above). On the other hand, in the verbs Miss Purdie examines, the NT makes decidedly less use of the compound than does Polybius; while the non- constative aorists which she notes as exceptions to the general tendency are reinforced by others which in Polybius are seldom such. Thus dev is comparatively rare in Polybius: “in several cases the meaning is purely constative, and those exx. in which a perfective! meaning must be admitted bear a very small proportion to the extremely frequent occurrences of the compound verb in the like
1 That is, ‘‘ punctiliar”: Miss Purdie does not distinguish this from per- fective proper (with preposition). Brugmann, following Delbriick, has lately insisted on reserving ‘‘perfective’’ for the compounds. Uniformity of ter- minology is so important that I have adapted the earlier phraseology throughout.

™ THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 117
sense” (op. cit. p. 94f.). In the NT, however, the simplex ἰδεῖν is exceedingly common, while the compound (καθορᾶν, Rom 1539) only appears once. It is moreover—so far as I can judge without the labour of a count—as often punctiliar (ingressive) as constative: Mt 210, “when they caught sight of the star,” will serve as an example, against constative uses like that in the previous verse, “the star which they saw.” (In numerous cases it would be difficult to dis- tinguish the one from the other.) Here comes in one of Meltzer’s criticisms, that the historian’s strong dislike of hiatus (cf above, p. 92) accounts for very many of his preferences for compound verbs. This fact undeniably. damages the case for Polybius himself; but it does not dis- pose of inferences—less decided, but not unimportant— which may be drawn from NT Greek and that of the papyri. We are not surprised to find that the NT has no perfective compounds of θεάομαι, θεωρέω, Aoylfouat, πράσσω, κινδυνεύω, ἄρχομαι, μέλλω, ὀργέξομαι, δύνω, or μίσγω (μέγνυμι), to set beside those cited (rightly or wrongly) from the historian. Noéw is rather difficult to square with the rule. Its present simplex is often obviously linear, as in νοῶν καὶ φρονῶν, the standing phrase of a testator beginning a will: the durative “understand” or “conceive” is the only possible translation in many NT passages. The aor. in Jn 12* and Eph 34 may be the constative of this, or it may be ingressive, “ realise.” But it is often difficult to make a real perfective out of the compound κατανοῆσαι, which should describe the completion of a mental process. In some passages, as Lk 20% (“he detected their craftiness ”), or Ac 7* (“to master the mystery ἢ), this will do very well; but the durative action is most cer- tainly represented in the present κατανοεῖν, except Ac 2739 (? “noticed one after another”). Madey is sometimes con- stative, summing up the process of μανθάνειν; but it has often purely point action, “ascertain”: so in Ac 237’, Gal 32, and frequently in the papyri. In other places moreover it describes a fully learnt lesson, and not the process of study. On Miss Purdie’s principle this should be reserved for καταμαθεῖν, which occurs in Mt 6%: both here and for κατανοήσατε in the Lucan parallel 12%?” the RV retains the durative “consider.” It may however mean “ understand,
118 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
take in this fact about.” The NT use of τελέω, again, differs widely from that of Polybius, where the perfective compound (συντ.) greatly predominates: in NT the simplex outnumbers it fourfold. Moreover the aorist in the NT is always punctiliar (“finish”): only in Gal 5%® is the constative “perform” a possible alternative. ᾿Οργισθῆναι is another divergent, for instead of the perfective diopy., “fly into a rage,” we six times have the simplex in the NT, where the constative aorist “be angry” never occurs. Finally we note that καθέζεσθαι is always purely durative in NT (“sit,” not “sit down,” which is καθίσαι), thus differing from Polybian use. A few additions might be made. Thus Lk 19} has the simplex πραγματεύσασθαι “trade,” with the perfective compound in v.5 διεπραγματεύσαντο “gained by trading.” But the great majority of the διώ compounds retain the full force of the διά. Provisional The net result of this comparison may Results. perhaps be stated thus, provisionally: for anything like a decisive settlement we must wait for some χαλκέντερος grammarian who will toil right through the papyri and the Kozvy literature with a minuteness matching Miss Purdie’s over her six books of Polybius—a task for which a year’s holiday is a condicio sine qua non. The growth of the constative aorist was certainly a feature in the development of later Greek: its consequences will occupy us when we come to the consideration of the Tenses. But the disuse of the “point” aorist, ingressive or effective, and the preference of the perfective compound to express the same meaning, naturally varied much with the author. The general tendency may be admitted as proved; the extent of its working will depend on the personal equation. In the use of compound verbs, especially, we cannot expect the negligé style of ordinary conversation, or even the higher degree of elaboration to which Luke or the auctor ad Hebreos could rise, to come near the profusion of a literary man like Polybius.” Time and Perhaps this brief account of recent re- Tense. searches, in a field hitherto almost untrodden by NT scholars, may suffice to prepare the
1 Rev 1118 might mean ‘‘were angry,” but the ingressive ‘‘ waxed angry” (at the accession of the King) suits the context better. 2 See p. 237.
THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 119
way for the necessary attempt to place on a scientific basis the use of the tenses, a subject on which many of the most crucial questions of exegesis depend. It has been made clear that the notion of (present or past) ἐΐηι6 is not by any means the first thing we must think of in dealing with tenses. For our problems of Aktionsart it is a mere accident that φεύγω is (generally) present and ἔφευγον, ἔφυγον, and φυγών past: the main point we must settle is the distinction between gdevy and φνγ which is common to all their moods.
The Present:— .. On the Present stem, as normally denoting linear or durative action, not much more need now be said. The reader may be reminded of one idiom which comes out of the linear idea, the use of words like πάλαι with the present in a sense best expressed by our perfect. Thus in 2 Co 12” “have you been thinking all this time?” or Jn 1557, “you have been with me from the beginning.” So in MGr, ἑξῆντα μῆνας σ᾽ ἀγαπῶ (Abbott 222). The durative present in such cases gathers up past and pre- sent time into one phrase. It must not be thought, however, that the durative meaning monopolises the present stem. In the prehistoric period only certain conjugations had linear action; and though later analogic processes mostly levelled the primitive diversity, there are still some survivals of importance. The punctiliar force is obvious in certain presents. Burton (M7' 9) cites as “aoristic presents” such words a8 παραγγέλλω Ac 1638, ἀφίενται Mk 2° (“are this moment forgiven,’—contr. ἀφέωνται Lk 5%), ἰᾶται Ac 9%, etc. So possibly ἀφίομεν Lk 114, which has ἀφήκαμεν as its representative in Mt. But here it seems better to recognise the tzerative present—“for we hahitually forgive ”: this is like the generalising of Luke seen in his version of the prayer for daily bread. (Cf also Lk 6%.) Blass (Ὁ. 188) adds ἀσπάξεται as the correlative to the regular ἀσπάσασθε. It is very possible that in the prehistoric period a distinct present existed for the strong aorist stem, such as Giles plausibly traces in ἄρχεσθαι compared with the durative ἔρχεσθαι. The conjecture—which is necessarily unverifiable
1 Manual? 482. The ap is like pa in τραπεῖν against τρέπειν, the familiar Greek representative of the original vocalic 7,
120 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
—would sufficiently explain this verb’s punctiliar action. But it may indeed be suspected that point and line action were both originally possible in present and aorist-stem for- mations which remained without formative prefix or suffix. On this assumption, analogical levelling was largely responsible for the durative character which belongs to most of the special conjugation stems of the present. But this is con- jectural, and we need only observe that the punctiliar roots which appear in the present stem have given rise to the use of the so-called present tense to denote future time. In αὔριον ἀποθνῇ- σκομεν (1 Co 15%") we have a verb in which the perfective prefix has neutralised the inceptive force of the suffix -ἰσκω: _ 1t is only the obsoleteness of the simplex which allows it ever to borrow a durative action. Εἶμε in Attic is a notable example of a punctiliar root used for a future in the present Indicative. But though it is generally asserted that this use of present tense for future originates in the words with momentary action, this limitation does not appear in the NT examples, any more than in English, We can say, “1 am going to London to-morrow” just as well as “I go”: and διέρχομαι in 1 Co 165, γίνεται in Mt 26%, and other futural presents that may be paralleled from the vernacular of the papyri, have no lack of durativity about them. In this stage of Greek, as in our own language, we may define the futural present as differing from the future tense mainly in the tone of assurance which is imparted. That the Present is not primarily a éense, in the usual acceptation of the term, is shown not only by the fact that it can stand for future time, but by its equally well-known use as a past.- The “Historic” present is divided by Brugmann (Gr. Gram’ 484f.) into the “dramatic” and the “registering” present. The latter occurs in historical documents with words like γύγνεται, τελευτᾷ, etc., registering a date. Tevvatay in Mt 25 is the nearest NT example I can think of, and it is not really parallel. The former, common in all vernaculars—we have
denoting future time ;
and past time;
1 Compare the close connexion between aorist (not present) subjunctive and the future, which is indeed in its history mainly a specialising of the former.
THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 121
only to overhear a servant girl’s “so she says to me,” if we desiderate proof that the usage is at home among us—is abundantly represented in the NT. From that mine of statistical wealth, Hawkins’s Hore Synoptice, we find that Mk uses the historic present 151 times, Mt 93 times, Lk 8 times, with 13 in Ac; also that it is rare in the LXX, except in Job, and in the rest of the NT, except in Jn. It does not, however, follow from this that it was “by no means common in Hellenistic Greek.” Sir John Hawkins himself observes that it is common in Josephus, and of course it was abundant in Attic. The fact that Luke invariably (except in 849) altered Mark’s favourite usage means probably that it was too familiar for his liking. I have not catalogued the evidence of the papyri for this phenomenon, but it is common. OP 717 may be cited as a document contemporary with the NT, in which a whole string of presents does duty in nar- rative. It may be seen alternating with past tenses, as in the NT: οὗ the curious document Par P 51 (ii/B.c.), recording
some extremely trivial dreams. Thus ἀνύγω. .. ὁρῶ. .. κλαίγω... ἐπορευύμην ... καὶ ἔρχομαι. . . ἔλεγον, etc.
It was indeed a permanent element in prose narrative, whether colloquial or literary ;1 but it seems to have run much the same course as in English, where the historic present is not normally used in educated conversation or in literature as a narrative form. It carries a special effect of its own, which may be a favourite mannerism of a particular author, but entirely avoided by others. Applying this prin- ciple, we conceive that Josephus would use the tense as an imitator of the classics, Mark as a man of the people who heard it in daily use around him; while Luke would have Greek education enough to know that it was not common in cultured speech of his time, but not enough to recall the encouragement of classical writers whom he probably never read, and would not have imitated if he had read them. The limits of the historic present are well seen in the fact that it is absent from Homer, not because it was foreign to
1A peculiar use of the historic present is noticeable in ΜΟΥ, where it fre- quently takes up a past tense: thus, ὁ Ἰσόλκας ἐξεσπάθωσε, κράζει τὰ παλληκάρια, ‘¢drew his sword and calls” (Abbott 44—see also 22, 26, etc.). See p. 139 ἡ.
122 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
the old Achaian dialect, but because of its felt incongruity in epic style: itis absent from the Wzbelungeniied in the same way. The Moods of the present stem will be treated under their separate heads later. But there are two uses which should come in here, as bearing on the kind of action belonging to the tense-stem. The first concerns the two normal methods of expressing Prohibition in Prohibitions: Classical Greek, which survive in NT Greek, though less predominant than before. There
is a familiar rule that μῇ is used with present imperative or aorist subjunctive; but the distinction between these, expounded by Gottfried Hermann long ago, seems to have been mostly unnoticed till it was rediscovered by Dr Walter Headlam in CR xvii. 295, who credits Dr Henry Jackson with supplying the hint. Dr Jackson himeelf con- tributes a brief but suggestive note in xvii. 262f. (June 1904), and Dr Headlam then writes in full upon the subject in xix. 30—36, citing the dicta of Hermann from which the doctrine started, and rebutting some objections raised by Mr H. D. Naylor.* Dr Jackson’s words may be cited as linking the beginning and end of the language-history, and proving incidentally that the alleged distinction must hold for the NT language, which lies midway. “ Davidson told me that, when in Modern he was learning modern Greek, he had been Greek ; puzzled about the distinction, until he heard
a Greek friend use the present imperative to
a dog which was barking. This gave him the clue. He turned to Plato’s Apology, and immediately stumbled upon the excellent instances 208 μὴ θορυβήσητε, before clamour begins, and 214 μὴ θορυβεῖτε, when it has begun.” The latter means in fact “desist from interrupting,” the former “do not interrupt (in future).” Headlam shows how the present imperative often calls out the retort, “But I am not doing so,” which the aorist locution never does: it would require “No, I will not.” This is certainly the case in MGr, where μὴ ypadys is addressed to a person who is already writing, μὴ γράψῃς to one who has not begun. The facts for classical and for present-day Greek may be supplemented from the four volumes of OP: we need not labour the proof of a canon which
could hardly be invalid for a period lying between periods @ See p. 247.
in Papyri;
THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 123
in which it is known to have been in force. I have noted in OP six cases of μή 6. aor. subj. referring to requests made in a letter, which of course cannot be attended to till the letter arrives. Thus μὴ ἀμελήσῃς, μὴ ἄλλως ποιήσῃς, ὅρα pndevl . . . προσκρούσῃς, etc. (all ii/a.D.). One other (OP 744, i/B.c.) is worth quoting as a sample of such requests followed by a reply: εἴρηκας... ὅτι Mn pe émiraOns. Πῶς δύναμαί σε ἐπιλαθεῖν; On the other hand, we have four cases of μῇ Ο. pres. imper., all clearly referable to the rule. Τοῦτο μὴ λέγε (what he had said)—py ἀγωνία (bis) “don’t go on worrying ”"—py) σκλύλλε ἑατὴν ἐνπῆναι (sic ἢ) “don’t bother to give information (??)”: in the last. case (295—i/a.p.) the writer had apparently left school young, and we can only guess her meaning, but it may well be “stop troubling.” As we shall see, the crux is the differentia of the present imperative, which is not easy to illustrate decisively from the papyri. Only one case seems to occur in FP (no. 112, from i/a.D.), and a gap there makes the meaning very obscure; nor are we more fortunate in Tb P, the prevalence of reports and accounts in this volume giving little opportunity for the construction. In the royal edict, Th P 6 (ii/Bc), we find καὶ μηθενὶ ἐπιτρέπετε καθ᾽ ὁντινοῦν τρόπον πράσσειν τι τῶν προδεδηλωμένων, the conformity of which with the rule is suggested by the words “as we have before commanded,” with which the sentence apparently opens: a hiatus again causes difficulty. The frequency of these prohi- and in NT bitions in NT presents a very marked contrast ‘to the papyri, but the hortatory character of the writing accounts for this. The following table gives the statistics for μή with the 2nd person :-—
c. pres. imp. c. aor, subj.
Mt. . . eo 12 29 Mk . . ὁ 8 9 Lk. . : . 27 19 Ac. . . . 5 4 Jnand Epp . . 19 1 Rev . . . 3 5 Paul . . . 47 8 Heb . . . ὄ 5 Jas. . . . 7 2 1Pet . . . 1 2
134 84
124 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
We have included the cases where μή is preceded by dpa or the like. But sometimes this is not (as in the Gospels) a mere compound prohibition, like our “take care not to...” In Gal 5% “take heed lest” can hardly be classed as a probibition at all; while in-Mk 1, dpa μηδενὶ εἴπῃς, there is virtual parataxis, dpa being only a sort of particle adding emphasis. The analysis of the list raises several suggestive points. In Mt we note that except 1” and 3° all the examples are from sayings of Christ, 39 in all, while in Lk 32 are thus described (36 if we include a citation of four precepts from the Decalogue). Since Mt has 12 pres. to 27 aor., but Lk 21 to 11, we see that there was no sort of uniformity in translating from the Aramaic. There is no case where Mt and Lk have varied the tense while using the same word in reporting the same logion;! but we find Mt altering Mk in 24%, manifestly for the better, if the canon is true. In Mk the balance is heavily inclined to the pres., for 5 out of 9 aor. examples are in the recitation of the commandments. In Jn there is only one aor., 3’, an exception the more curious in that desine mirari seems clearly the meaning; but see below. Paul uses the aor. even less than he appears to do, for Rom 106 is a quotation, and Col 27! ¢er virtually such: this leaves only 2 Th 3%, 1 Tim 5}, 2 Tim 18, with Gal 515, on which see above. Heb has only two aorists (10° 12%—the latter with βλέπετε), apart from a triple quotation 38 % 4, The very marked predominance of the μὴ ποίει type is accordingly unbroken except in Mt, and in Rev and 1 Pet so far as they go. In the NT as a whole the proportion is 61 p.c. to 39, which does not greatly differ from the 56 to 44 noted in the Attic Orators by Miller (AJP xiii. 423).
Before we proceed to draw our deduc- tions from the canon thus applied to the NT, it will be well to present a few of the passages in which it obviously holds. In the following places the reply to the μὴ ποίει must clearly be either “T am not doing so” or “I will stop doing it”:—Mk 5%
Passages agreeing.
1 Ὁ uses κωλύσητε in Lk 1818, where Mt and Mk, as well as the other MSS in Lk, have the much more appropriate present.
THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 125
989 and parallels, Lk 718 849 852 (cf Mk τί κλαίετε.) 10% 1117 1422 23% Jn 236 51 1971 201% 27, Ac 10% 189 2010, Rom 113% 2% 14% 1 Co 777, 1 Tim 5%, Jas 21, 1 Pet 4:3 Rev ὅδ, In the following, the μὴ ποιήσῃς would be answered with “I will avoid doing so”:—Mt 618 109 179, Mk 856 9%, Lk 6” 1094 (contrast the two prohibitions) 148 218, Ac 7° 9% 16% 2371, 1 Tim 51, 2 Tim 18, Rev 66 78 104 (following ἤμελλον ypaderv—he had not begun). . It must however be admitted that rather Difficulties. . strong external pressure is needed to force the rule upon Paul. It is not merely that his usage is very one-sided. So is that of Jn, and yet (with the doubtful exception of 10°) every present he uses fits the canon completely. But does μὴ ἀμέλει in 1 Tim 44 require us to believe that Timothy was “neglecting” his “ charism ”— μηδενὶ ἐπιτίθει and μηδὲ κοινώνει in 5%—that he was warned to stop what he was hitherto guilty of ? May we not rather say that μὴ ἀμέλει is equivalent to πάντοτε μελέτα or the like, ἃ marked durative, with a similar account of μηδὲ xowvover? If we paraphrase the first clause in 52 “always be deliberate in choosing your office-bearers,”’ we see the iterate! force of the present coming in; and this we recognise again in typical passages like Lk 10’, Rom 633, Eph 4%, Heb 13°, 2 Jn, 1 Jn 44. Then in 1 Co 1489 how are we to imagine Paul bidding the Corinthians “ desist from forbidding” the exercise of their darling charism? His μὴ κωλύετε means “do not discourage glossolaly, as after my previous words you might be inclined to do.” In other words, we have the conative, which is clearly needed also in such passages as Gal 51. My ποίει accordingly needs various mental supplements, and not one only. It is “Stop doing,’ or “Do not (from time to time),” or “Do not (as you are in danger of doing),” or “ Do not attempt to do.” We are not justified in excluding, for the purposes of the present imperative in prohibitions, the various kinds of action which we find attached to the present stem elsewhere.
1 See below, p. 128. In 1Cod.c. we might also trace the iterative, if the meaning is ‘‘Do not repress glossolaly, whenever it breaks out.” So Dr Findlay.
126 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
But since the simple linear action is by far the commonest in the present stem, it naturally follows that μὴ ποίει usually means “stop doing,” though (as Headlam admits, CR xix. 31) it does not always mean this. To account for such difficulties on the other side as Jn 3’, we may well pursue the quotation from the scholar who started us on this discussion. “Μὴ δράσῃς always, I believe, means J warn you against doing this, I beseech you will not; though this is sometimes used when the thing is being done; notably in certain cases which may be called colloquial or idiomatic, with an effect of impatience, μὴ φροντίσης Oh, never mind ! μὴ δείσῃς Never fear! μὴ θαυμάσῃς You mustn't be surprised.”
Perhaps my main motive in pursuing
We fore this long discussion has been to solve a μὴ ποίει question that has consequences for our
Church History. What are we to infer when we find Paul bidding his converts μὴ μεθύσκεσθε (Eph 578), μὴ ψεύδεσθε (Col 3°), or James changing the logion of Mt 5% % into the suggestive present (5%)? What has been said will make it clear that such commands were very practical indeed,—that the apostles were not tilting at windmills, but uttering urgent warnings against sins which were sure to reappear in the Christian com- munity, or were as yet only imperfectly expelled. The critics who make so much of lapses among Christian converts of the first generation in modern missions might have damned Paul’s results with equal reason. Time has shown—time will show.!
The second point in which we shall
Present . . . Participle,  9nticipate later discussion concerns the uses of the Participle. Like the rest of the verb, outside the indicative, it has properly no sense of time attaching to it: the linear action in a participle, connected with a finite verb in past or present time, partakes in the time of its principal. But when the participle is isolated by the addition of the article, its proper timelessness is free to come out. This can hardly happen with the aorist, where point action in such a connexion cannot well exist without the suggestion of past time: ἡ τεκοῦσα must be rendered “she who bore a child,’ not because τεκοῦσα is past in
1 See p. 238.
THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 127
time like érexe, but because the action is not in progress and therefore must be past. But ἡ τίκτουσα is common in tragedy (cf Gal 4537) as a practical synonym of ἡ μήτηρ, the title of a continuous relationship. Winer (p. 444) gives a good selection of classical exx.: add from the papyri such as CPR 24 ete. (ii/aD.) τοῖς γαμοῦσι, “the contracting parties,” who are called ot γεγαμηκότες in a similar docu- ment,CPR 28 (ii/a.p.). Soo κλέπτων, Eph 4%, is not “he who stole” or “he who steals,” but simply “the stealer,” differing from ὁ κλέπτης “the thief” only in being more closely associated with the verb κλεπτέτω which is coming. If the Baptist is called ὁ βαπτίζων (Mk 615 %), “the baptiser,” the phrase is less of a technical term than the noun, but is other- wise synonymous therewith. An agent-noun almost neces- sarily connotes linear action: there are only a few exceptions, like “murderer,” “bankrupt,” where the title is generally given in respect of an act committed in the past. Hence it coincides closely with the action of the present participle, which with the article (rarely without—see Kiihner-Gerth i. 266) becomes virtually a noun. We return to the aorist participle later, and need not say more on the minute part of its field which might be connected with the subject of this paragraph. But it must be remarked that the principle of a timeless present participle needs very careful application, since alternative explanations are often possible, and grammar speaks to exegesis here with no decisive voice. In my Introduction? (p. 199) Mt 27”, ὁ καταλύων τὸν ναόν, “the destroyer of the temple,” was given as an ex. of a participle turned noun. But the conative force is not to be missed here: “you would-be destroyer” gives the meaning more exactly. Another ambiguous case may be quoted from Heb 10%: is τοὺς ἁγιαζομένους timeless, “the objects of sanctification,” or iterative, “those who from time to time receive sanctification,” or purely durative, “those who are in process of sanctifica- tion”? The last, involving a suggestive contrast with the perfect tereXeimxev—telling (like the unique ἐστὲ σεσῳσμένοι of Eph 25 8) of a work which is finished on its Author’s side, but progressively realised by its objects,— brings the tense into relation with the recurrent οἱ ofopevor and ot ἀπολλύμενοι, in which durative action is conspicuous.
128 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
The examples will suttice to teach the importance οἱ caution.
We turn to the Imperfect, with which we The Imperfect. enter the sphere of Tense proper, the idea of past time being definitely brought in by the presence of the augment. This particle—perhaps a demonstrative base in its origin, meaning “ then ”—is the only decisive mark of past or present time that the Indo-Germanic verb possesses, . unless the final - in primary tenses is rightly conjectured to have denoted present action in its prehistoric origin. Applied to the present stem, the augment throws linear action into the past; applied to the aorist, it does the same for punctiliar action. The resultant meaning is naturally various. We may have pictorial narrative, as contrasted with the summary given by the aorist. Thus the sculptor will some- times sign his work ὁ δεῖνα ἐποίει, sometimes ἐποίησε : the former lays the stress on the labour of production, the latter on the artist’s name. When the difference is a matter of emphasis, we naturally find it sometimes evanescent. “Edn, imperfect in form, is aorist in meaning, because φᾷ is a punctiliar root. But ἔλεγεν often differs very little from elrrev—its pictorial character is largely rubbed off by time, and in MGr the two forms are mere equivalents. In words less worn the distinction can hardly ever be ignored. The categories to which we were alluding just now, in discussing the participle, are everywhere conspicuous in the imperfect indicative. Thus we have frequently the iterative, its graph (....ὕ. ) instead οἱ (——), describing past action that was repeated. Especially important, because more liable to be missed, is the conative imperfect, for which we might give the graph ( ). Action going on implies the contingency of its failure to reach an end: our linear graph may either be produced beyond our vision, or reach a definite terminus in view (κατήσθιον, perfective, see above, p. 111), or stop abruptly in vacuo. How important this is for the NT may be seen from some of the passages, in which the Revisers have earned our gratitude by their careful treatment of the Tenses, a specially strong point of their work. Ac 26" is a notable example: the AV commits Paul to the statement that he had actually forced weak Christians to renounce their Master.



THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 129
Now in itself ἠνάγκαξον" might of course be “I repeatedly forced,” the iterative imperfect just referred to. But the sudden abandonment of the aorist, used up to this point, gives a strong grammatical argument for the alternative “I tried to force,” which is made certain by the whole tone of the Apostle in his retrospect: we cannot imagine him telling of such a success so calmly! Other typical exx. are Mt 814. Lk 15, Ac 7%, the RV being right in all: in Ac dc. the AV curiously blundered into the right meaning by mistranslating a wrong text. (Their συνήλασεν would naturally mean that he “ drove” them to shake hands! Did the translators (Tyndale and his successors) mistake this for συνήλλασσεν, or did they consciously emend? The Vulgate reconciliabat may have encouraged them.) In Mk 9% the Revisers unfortunately corrected the text without altering the translation: it seems clear that the imperfect is conative, the man refusing to be stopped in his good work. So also in Heb 11” προσέφερεν appears to be a conative imperfect, as the RV takes it: the contrast between the ideally accomplished sacrifice, as per- manently recorded in Scripture (προσενήνοχεν), and the historic fact that the deed was not finished, makes an extremely strong case for this treatment of the word. I cannot therefore here agree with Thumb, who says that we expect an aorist, and suggests that ἔφερον had already begun to be felt as an aorist as in MGr ἔφερα, the aorist of φέρνω (TALZ xxviii. 423). He cites no ancient parallel; and of all NT writers the author of Heb is the least likely to start an innovation of this kind.’ (See p. 238.) The Aorist :— In the Aorist indicative, as in the Imper- fect, we have past time brought in by the use of the augment. To appreciate the essential character of aorist action, therefore, we must start with the other moods. The contrast of its point action with the linear of the present stem is well seen in δὸς σήμερον in Mt 6", against δίδου τὸ καθ᾽ ἡμέραν in Lk 115: cf also Mt 5” τῷ αἰτοῦντι δός, but παντὶ αἰτοῦντι δίδου in Lk 6; and (with respective parts reversed) Mt 5! χαίρετε, without note of time, but Lk 6% χάρητε ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳς The Imperative shows the con- trast so well that we may add another example : Rom 61° gives
us present παριστάνετε (see pp. 122 ff.) and παραστήσατε to- 9 @b¢ See p. 247. |
130 A GRAMMAR OF: NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
gether in marked antithesis—the daily struggle, always ending in surrender, and the once-for-all surrender to God which brings deliverance. Note further the delicate nuance in Ac 1δ51..: Barnabas, with easy forgetfulness of risk, wishes σὺν- παραλαβεῖν Mark—Paul refuses συνπαραλαμβάνειν, to have with them day by day one who had shown himself unreliable. Examples are very numerous, and there are few of the finer shades of meaning which are more important to grasp, just because they usually defy translation. The three kinds of point action, Ingressive, Effective, and Constative,! are not . always easy to distinguish. Two or even Classified. three of them may be combined in one verb, as we saw above with βαλεῖν (p. 109); for of course this may be the summary of βάλλειν “ throw,” as well as “let fly ” and “hit”. In usage however nearly all verbs keep to one end or other of the action; though the marked growth of the constative enlarges the number of cases in which the whole action is comprised in one view. Thus from βασιλεύειν we have the ingressive aorist in βασιλεύσας ἀναπαήσεται, “ having come to his throne he shall rest” (Agraphon, OP 654 and Clem. Al.), and the constative in Rev 20* “they reigned a thousand years.” The ingressive especially belongs to verbs of state or condition (Goodwin M7 16). For the effective aorist, we may compare durative τελεῖν “fulfil, bring to perfection” (2 Co 129 “my power is being per- fected in weakness”) with the aorist τελέσαν “ finish” (Lk | 289 etc.). The constative is used apparently in Gal 516 (above, p. 118). . The aorist participle raises various ques- Aorist Participle tions of its own, which must be considered of Coincident . Action, here in so far as they concern the nature of aorist action. The connotation of past time has largely fastened on this participle, through the idiomatic use in which it stands before an aorist indicative to qualify its action. As point action is always completed action, except in the ingressive, the participle naturally came to involve

1 We may express them by the graph A ——-5 B, denoting motion from A to B. A will be Ingressive, B Effective, and the Constative would be the line reduced to a point by perspective,
THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 131
past time relative to that of the main verb. Presumably this would happen less completely when the participle stood second, The assumption of past time must not however be regarded as a necessary or an accomplished process. In many cases, especially in the NT, the participle and the main verb denote coincident or identical action. So azo- κριθεὶς εἶπεν Mt 22} etc.) καλῶς ἐποίησας παραγενόμενος Ac 10%. The latter puts into the past a formula constantly recurring in the papyri: thus FP 121 (i/ii a.p.) εὖ ποιήσεις δούς “you will oblige me by giving ”—sidederis in Latin. In Jn 11% we have εὐποῦσα first for past action and then εἴπασα (BC*) for coincident: the changed form is suggestive, but is perhaps without conscious significance. One probable example of coincident action may be brought in here because of its inherent difficulty, though it belongs rather to lexicon than to grammar. The participle ἐπιβαλών (Mk 147%)— which may well have been obscure even to Mt and Lk, who both dropped it—has now presented itself in the Ptolemaic papyrus Tb P 50, ἐπιβαλὼν συνέχωσεν τὰ ἐν τῆι ἑαυτοῦ γῆι μέρη τοῦ σημαινομένου ὑδραγωγοῦ, which I translate, “he set to and dammed up.” It is true that in Tb P 13 ἐπιβολή means “embankment,” as Dr Swete has pointed out to me.? But Dr F. G. Kenyon has since observed that if ἐπιβάλλω were here used of casting up earth, it would add nothing to συνέχωσεν alone. Moreover, since Mark’s phrase has to be explained in any case, there is good reason for taking the word in the same sense in both places. Many versions either take this view of ἐπιβαλών (cf Euthymius’ gloss ἀρξάμενος), or translate the paraphrase ἤρξατο found in D. Mt and Lk substitute the ingressive aorist ἔκλαυσεν. If this account is right, ἐπιβαλών is the aorist coincident with the first point of the linear ὄκλαιεν, and the compound phrase expresses with peculiar vividness both the initial paroxysm
1 This phrase, except for Ac 19*5 25°, occurs in the Semitic atmosphere alone ; so that we should look at the Hebrew 1p) jy, which suggested it through the medium of the LXX. (It is not Aramaic, Dalman thinks, Words 24f.) The form of the Hebrew prompts Dr Findlay to suggest that ἀποκριθείς is ingressive, εἶπεν consecutive upon it. That ἀποκριθῆναι is generally constative, does not make this account any less possible.
2 See notes in Hxpos. vi. vii. 118 and viii. 480,
132 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
and its long continuance, which the easier but tamer word of the other evangelists fails to do. There are even cases where the participle No Evidence for ,.ems to involve subsequent action. Thus in that of Subse- -. . quent Action. Pindar Pyth. iv. 189 we have, “when the flower of his sailor-folk came down to Iolcos, Jason mustered and thanked them all (λέξατο ἐπαινήσαις). This is really coincident action, as Gildersleeve notes; but of course, had the poet felt bound to chronicle the exact order of proceedings, he would have put the muster first. I am strongly disposed to have recourse to this for the much - discussed ἀσπασάμενοι in Ac 25%, though Hort’s suspicions of “prior corruption” induce timidity. It might seem more serious still that Blass (p. 197) pronounces “the reading of the majority of the MSS ... not Greek,”? for Blass comes as near to an Athenian revenant as any modern could hope to be. But when he says that the “accompanying circumstance ... cannot yet be regarded as concluded,” may we not reply that in that case Pindar’s ἐπαινήσαις equally needs emending? The effective aorist κατήντησαν is very different from a durative like ἐπορεύοντο, which could only have been followed by a word describing the purpose before them on their journey. But in “they arrived on a complimentary visit” I submit that the case is really one of identical action. The RV text gives the meaning adequately.* There are a good many NT passages in which exegesis has to decide between antecedent and coincident action, in places where the participle stands second: Heb 915 will serve as an example. It would take too much space
1 Blass here slurs over the fact that not one uncial reads the future. The paraphrastic rendering of the Vulgate cannot count, and a reading supported by nothing better than the cursive 61 had better be called a conjecture outright. (Blass’s misquotation κατῆλθον, by the way, is not corrected in his second edition.) As little can I share his confidence that Jn 113 ‘‘is certainly an interpolation” (p. 198 n.). What difficulty is there in the explanation he quotes, ‘* who as ts well known did (or, has done) this”? (See p.-238.)
2 75 may quote an example from the vernacular: OP 530 (ii/A.D.) ἐξ ὧν δώσεις Σαραπίωνι τῷ φίλῳ. .. λυτρώσασά μου τὰ ἱμάτια Sp. ἑκατόν, ‘of which you will give ‘my uncle’ Sarapion 100 drachme and redeem my clothes.” We should add that Dr Findlay would regard dow, in Ac é.c. as denoting the initial act of κατήντησαν. See further p. 238.
THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 133
to discuss adequatély the alleged examples of subsequent action participles for which Ramsay pleads (Paul, p. 212), but a few comments must be ventured. In Ac 16° (WH) —the first of a series of passages which Rackham (Acis, p. 184) regards as “decisive”—-we really have nothing to show when the Divine monition was given. Assuming Ramsay's itinerary correct, and supposing that the travellers realised the prohibition as far on as Pisidian Antioch, the aorist remains coincident, or even antecedent, for they had not yet crossed the Asian frontier. In 23° (and 22”) it is entirely arbitrary to make assumptions as to the order of the items. The former is “he said . . ., meanwhile ordering him . . .,” which may perfectly well mean that Felix first told his soldiers where they were to take Paul, and then assured the prisoner of an early hearing, just before the guards led him away. In 224 Lysias presumably said in one sentence, “Bring him in and examine him.” In 17% the opicas is not “Jater” than the ἐποίησεν in time: the determination of man’s home preceded his creation, in the Divine plan. Rackham’s other “decisive” exx. are 2422, in which elas and διαταξάμενος are items in the action described by ἀνε- βάλετο; and 7%, where the constative ἐξήγαγεν describes the Exodus as a whole. Rackham’s object is to justify the reading of SBHLP αἱ in 12”, by translating “they returned to J. and fulfilled their ministry and took with them John.” Now “returned ... in fulfilment...” is a good coincident aorist and quite admissible. But to take συνπαραλαβόντες in this way involves an unblushing aorist of subsequent action, and this I must maintain has not yet been paralleled either in the NT or outside. Hort’s conjecture -- τὴν eis “I. πληρώσαντες Staxoviav—mends this passage best. The alternative is so flatly out of agreement with the normal use of the aorist participle that the possibility of it could only introduce serious confusion into the language. Prof. Ramsay’s appeal to Blass will not lie, I think, for any “subsequent action” use: we have already referred to the great grammarian’s non possumus for Ac 251, which entirely bars his assent to any interpretation involving more than coincident action. All that he says on 23* is that κελεύσας = ἐκέλευσέν τε, which is not warrant for Ramsay’s inference.
134 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
On the whole case, we may safely accept the vigorous state- ment of Schmiedel on Ac 16° (ZB it. 1599): “It has to be maintained that the participle must contain, if not something antecedent to ‘they went’ (διῆλθον), at least something synchronous with it, in no case a thing subsequent to it, if all the rules of grammar and all sure understanding of language are not to be given up.”
The careful study of the aorist participle Timeless . ος . ος . Acrists, Will show surviving uses of its original time-
less character, besides those we have noted already. Lk 1018 ἐθεώρουν (durative) τὸν Σατανᾶν... ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ wecovra,—which is exactly like Aesch. PV 956,
οὐκ ἐκ τῶνδ᾽ ἐγὼ [80. περγάμων] δισσοὺς τυράννους ἐκπεσόντας ἠσθόμην,3 or Homer J. vi. 284, εἰ κεῖνόν ye Είδοιμι κατελθόντ᾽ “Aidos εἴσω----
belongs to a category of which many ΘΧΧ.. are given by Goodwin MT ὃ 148, in which the sense of past time does not appear: cf Monro HG 212,401. “I watched him fall” will be the meaning, the aorist being constative: πίπτοντα “falling” (cf Vulg. cadentem) would have been much weaker, suggesting the possibility of recovery. The triumphant ἔπεσεν ἔπεσεν of Rev 18? (cf next page) is the same action. We need not stay to show the timelessness of the aorist in the imperative, subjunctive and infinitive: there never was any time connotation except when in reported speech an optative or infinitive aorist took the place of an indicative. Cases where an aorist indicative denotes present time, or even future, demand some attention. ᾿Εβλήθη in Jn 15° is paralleled by the well-known classical idiom seen in Euripides Ale, 386, ἀπωλόμην εἴ pe λείψεις, “ I am undone if you leave me.” 85 Similarly in ἐξέστη, Mk 3%, English again demands the perfect, “he has gone out of his mind.” Jannaris HG ὃ 1855 notes that this idiom survives in MGr. In Rom 1453 an analogous use of the perfect may be seen. The difficult aorist of Mk 1" and parallels, ἐν σοὶ εὐδόκησα, is probably “on thee I have set the seal of my approval”: literally “I set,”
1 Ac 2116 may be rendered ‘‘ we ceased, with the words .. .” 3 Suggested by my friend Mr H. Bisseker.
8 See Giles, Manual? 499. (*See p. 247.
THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 136
at a time which is not defined. None of these exx. are really in present time, for they only seem to be so through a difference in idiom between Greek and English. We have probably to do here with one of the most ancient uses of the aorist—the ordinary use in Sanskrit—expressing what has just happened :* οἱ Mk 16%, Lk 716 14% 158 24% Jn 114 1219 181 (ἦλθεν) 13%! 2110 Rev 148 18%, etc., and see p. 140.1 In two other uses we employ the present, the “epistolary ” (as Eph 6”), and the so-called “gnomic” aorist. Goodwin (MT § 155) observes that the gnomic aorist and perfect “give a more vivid statement of general truths, by employ- ing a distinct case or several distinct cases in the past to represent (as it were) all possible cases, and implying that what has occurred is likely to occur again under similar circumstances.” The present is much commoner than the aorist, which generally (Goodwin § 157) refers to “a single or a sudden occurrence, while the present (as usual) implies duration.” The gnomic aorist survives in MGr (Jannaris HG ὃ 1852), and need not have been denied by Winer for Jas 111 and 1 Pet 1%: see Hort’s note on the latter. Jas 1** combines aor. and perf. in a simile, reminding us of the closely allied Homeric aorist in similes.
English We have seen that the aorist descriptive Rendering of what has just happened has to be rendered of Aorist in English by what we call our Perfect Tense. Indicative. 1+ must be admitted that this is not the only
usage in which the English and the Greek past tenses do not coincide. Our English Past—historically a syncretic tense, mostly built on the Perfect—is essentially a definite tense, connoting always some point or period of time at which the action occurred. But in Greek this is not necessarily involved at all. Idiomatically we use the past in pure narrative, where the framework of the story implies the continuous dating of the events ; and though the Greek aorist has not this implica- tion, we may regard the tenses as equivalent in practice. But outside narrative we use the periphrastic have tense as an
1 Τῃ classical Greek we may find an aorist of this kind used with a sequence which would naturally suggest a foregoing perfect, as Euripides, Medea 218 f.: ἐξῆλθον δόμων μὴ μοί τι μέμφησθ᾽, See Verrall’s note. [5 866 p. 247.
136 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
indefinite past ; and it thus becomes the inevitable representa tive of the Greek aorist when no time is clearly designed: eg 1 Co 15 τινὲς ἐκοιμήθησαν, “fell asleep (at various times),” and so “have fallen asleep.” This has two unfortunate results. We have to decide for ourselves whether a Greek aorist refers to definite or indefinite time—often no easy task. And we have to recognise that our own perfect is ambiguous: it is not only the genuine Perfect, describing action in the past with continuance into present time, but also the simple indefinite Past. As Dr J. A. Robinson says (Gospels, p. 107), on ἔκρυψας and ἀπεκάλυψας in Mt 11%: “If we render, ‘Thou didst hide . . . Thou didst reveal,’ ... our minds are set to search for some specially appropriate moment to which reference may be made. The familiar rendering, ‘Thou hast hid . . . Thou hast revealed,’ expresses the sense of the Greek far more closely, though we are using what we call a ‘perfect.’ The fact needs to be recognised that our simple past and our perfect tense do not exactly coincide in meaning with the Greek aorist and perfect respectively. The translation of the aorist into English must be determined partly by the context and partly by considerations of euphony.”! The use of the English perfect to render the aorist evidently needs careful guarding, lest the impression of a true perfect be produced. Take for example Rom 15. The AV “we have received” decidedly rings as a _ perfect: it means “I received originally and still possess.” This lays the emphasis on the wrong element, for Paul clearly means that when he did receive a gift of grace and a commission from God, it was through Christ he received it. This is not an indefinite aorist at all. If aman says to his friend, “Through you I got a chance in life,” we should never question the idiom: “have got” would convey a distinct meaning. Among the paraphrasers of Rom, Moffatt
1 This thesis was elaborately worked out by Dr R. F. Weymouth in a pamphlet, On the Rendering into English of the Greek Aorist and Perfect (1890: since in 2nd ed.). His posthumous ΝΤ in Modern Speech was intended to give effect to the thesis of the pamphlet. Weymouth’s argument is damaged by some not very wise language about the RV; but in this one point it may fairly be admitted that the Revisers’ principles were sometimes applied in rather too rigid a manner. See however pp. 137 ff.


THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 137
and the Twentieth Century NT rightly give the past tense here with the RV: Rutherford, Way and Weymouth less accurately give the perfect. The limitations of our idiom are evident in the contrasted tenses of Mk 166 and 1 Co 154. ᾿Ηγέρθη states simply the past complete fact, the astounding news of what had just happened—see above on this use of the aorist. ᾿Ενγήγερται sets forth with the utmost possible emphasis the abiding results of the event, which supply the main thought of the whole passage. But “He is risen” is the only possible translation for the former; while in the latter, since a definite time is named, our usage rather rebels against the perfect which the sense so strongly demands. We must either sacrifice this central thought with the AV and the free translators, who had a chance that was denied to the literal versions, or we must frankly venture on “translation English ” with the RV: to fit our idiom we might detach the note of time and say “that he hath been raised —raised on the third day, according to the scriptures.” AV and RV , The subject of the rendering of the in Mt. reek aorist is so important that no apology is needed for an extended enquiry. We will examine the usage of AV and RV in Mt, which will serve as a typical book. If my count is right, there are 65 indicative aorists in Mt which are rendered by both AV and RV alike with the English perfect, or in a few cases the present; while in 41 the AV is deserted by the RV for the simple past.2 These figures alone are enough to dispose of any wholesale criticism. In 11 of the 41 Weymouth himself uses the past in his free translation. His criticism therefore touches between a quarter and a third of the
1 Including 612, where the AV would certainly have translated ἀφήκαμεν as the RV has done. In a private memorial which was sent to the Revisers by an unnamed colleague, before their final revision, it is stated that out of nearly 200 places in the Gospels where the aorist was rendered by the English perfect, the Revisers had only followed the AV in 66. The figures above for Mt show that the appeal took effect ; but in Jn 17, which is specially named, the 21 exx. remain in the published text. That the majority were right there, I cannot doubt: the English perfect in that chapter obscures a special feature of the great prayer, the tone of detachment with which the Lord contemplates His earthly life as a period lying in the past.
2 One passage, 18", is only in RVmg.
138 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
passages which come under our notice in Mt. From which we may fairly infer that the Revisers’ English was, after all, not quite as black as it was painted. In examining the material, we will assume in the first instance that the aorist is rightly rendered by our perfect (or present) in all the places where AV and RV agree. (This is only assumed for the sake of argument, as will be seen below.) Our first task then is with the 41 passages in which there is a difference. Of these Weymouth’s own translation justifies 2% (a very definite aor.—see Hos 111) 5%! 88, 88, 43 (here AV was misled by its wrong translation of τοῖς dpyatous—it is right in v.21. 27) 1034 (AV came in one of the three) 17% 21% 2540, We may further deduct 216 as justified by the AV in v.“, and 25** * ag on all fours with the past “I sowed.” It remains to discuss the legitimacy of the English past in the rest of the exx. Our test shall be sought in idiomatic sentences, constructed so as to carry the same grammatical conditions: they are purposely assimilated to the colloquial idiom, and are therefore generally made parallel in grammar only to the passages they ilustrate. In each case the pre- terite tacitly implies a definite occasion; and the parallel will show that this implication is at least a natural under- standing of the Greek. Where the perfect is equally idiomatic, we may infer that the Greek is indeterminate. Taking them as they come, 2? εἴδομεν seems to me clearly definite: “I saw the news in the paper and came off at once.” 37 ὑπέδειξεν : “has warned” may be justified, but “Who told you that?” is presumably Englishh We may put together 517 10% (ἦλθον) 15% (ἀπεστάλην). As we have seen, the AV and Weymouth use the past in one of these passages, and they are all on the same footing. “I came for business, not for pleasure” is good enough English, even if “have come” is likewise correct and not very different. Or compare Shakspere’s
“Why came I hither but for that intent ?”
In 7% (ἐπροφητεύσαμεν, ἐξέβαλομεν, ἐποιήσαμεν) the perfect would be unobjectionable, but the past is quite idiomatic: οὗ such a sentence as “Now then—didn’t I make speeches all over the country? MDidn’t I subscribe liberally to the


THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 139
party funds?” 108 (ἐλάβετε): cf “What do you expect ἢ You paid nothing: you get nothing.” 11” (ηὐλίσαμεν, etc.): cf “ There’s no pleasing you. I made small talk, and you were bored: I gave you a lecture, and you went to sleep.” 11% (ἀπέκρυψας, amexaddAuas—see above): cf “I am very glad you kept me in the dark, and told my friend.” 131” (ἐπεθύμησαν, εἶδον, ἤκουσαν): here no better justification is needed than Watts’s “How blessed are our ears That hear this joyful sound, Which kings and prophets waited for, And sought, but never found.”
13 (ἔκρυψε): the aorist is almost gnomic, like Jas 1%, but it would be wrong to obliterate the difference between the aorist and the present (historic) which follows! 15% ἐφύ- τευσεν)ὴ: cf “Every movement which you didn’t start is wrong.” 167 (ἐλάβομεν) : cf “I brought no money away with me.” 1912 (εὐνούχισαν) is to my mind the only decided exception. Unless Origen’s exegesis was right, the third verb does not refer to a single event like the other two, except so far as concerns the moment of renunciation in the past: the perfect therefore would perhaps be less misleading, despite apparent inconsistency. 21% (ἐξηράνθη): cf “ How on earth did that happen?” (AV wrongly joins πῶς and παραχρῆμα) 21 (éyevnOy—for ἐγένετο see above) is ambiguous: if it is the aorist of an event just completed, the AV is right, but this may well be pure narrative. 28% (διεφημίσθη) : here the added words “[and continueth] ” leave the verb to be a narrative aorist. Finally 282° (éveres- λάμην) is obviously idiomatic: cf “ Mind you attend to everything I told you.” In all these passages then, with one possible exception, the simple past is proved to be entirely idiomatic ; and if this is allowed, we may freely concede the perfect as permissible in several cases, and occasionally perhaps preferable.
Let us go back for a moment to our lists for Mt, to
1¥For this idiom see p. 121 ἢ. above. Wellhausen, on Mk 7% (inl. 16), makes it an Aramaism. In view of the MGr usage, we can only accept this with the proviso that it be counted good vernacular Greek as well.
140 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
draw some inferences as to the meaning of the aorist where simple narrative, and the reference to a specific time, are mostly excluded. Parenthetically, we might strike out a few of the passages in which AV and RV agree on the English perfect. 13% is not indefinite: “ You did that ” is quite as correct as “ You have done it,’ and seems to me more suitable where the emphasis is to lie on the subject. In 19° συνέζευξεν carries the thought immediately and obviously to the wedding day: “those whom God joined together” is on this view preferable. Similarly ἀφήκαμεν (-xev) in 1951. calls up unmistakably the day of the sacrifice. In 20’ we cannot object to rendering “has hired”; but it may be observed that “nobody asked you” is not exactly a Grecism. And surely ἥμαρτον παραδούς (274) is definite enough—*“I sinned when I betrayed”? We may end this section by putting together the exx. of two important categories. Under the head of “things just happened” come 98 ἐτελεύτησεν (with ἄρτι); 5% ἐμοίχευσεν and 14° παρῆλθεν and 17)? ἦλθε (with ἤδη); 613 ἀφήκαμεν, 122 ἔφθασεν, 142 “5. ἠγέρθη, 16” ἀπε- κάλυψε, 18% ἐκέρδησας, 2012 ἐποίησαν -ας, 2610 ἠργάσατο 26:18 ἐποίησε, 26% ἐβλασφήμησεν, ἠκούσατε, 2655. 6. εἶπας, 271 ἔπαθον, 27 ἐγκατέλιπες, 287 εἶπον, 2818 ἐδόθη (unless 115 forbids), and perhaps 214 ἐγενήθη. Some of these may of course be otherwise explained. If they rightly belong to this heading, the English perfect is the correct rendering. Equally tied to the have tense are the aorists of indefinite time-refer- ence; but we must be ready to substitute our preterite as soon as we see reason to believe that the time of occurrence is at all prominently before the writer’s mind. Clear examples of this are 5%! * ἠκούσατε, 8° εὗρον, 1035 ἐπεκάλεσαν, 128 “5 ἀνέγνωτε (οὐδέποτε in 2115 brings in the note of time: οἵ Shakspere, “ Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee ?), 13% ἐπαχύνθη etc., 15° ἠκυρώσατε, 13% 18% 225 ὡμοιώθη (probably because the working out of the comparison included action partially past: Zahn compares Jn 919), 2116 κατηρτίσω, 23% ἀφήκατε, 24% κατέστησεν, 2050. 33 ἐκέρδησα, 2738 ἐποίησε. The Perfect :— Our study of the English periphrastic perfect prepares us for taking up the most important, exegetically, of all the Greek Tenses. In Greek, as in
THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 141
English, the line between aorist and perfect is not always easy to draw. The aorist of the event just passed has inherently that note of close connexion between past and present which is the differentia of the Greek perfect ; while the perfect was increasingly used, as the language grew older, as a substitute for what would formerly have been a narrative aorist. A cursory reading of the papyri soon shows us how much more the vernacular tends to use this tense; and the inference might be drawn that the old distinction of aorist and perfect was already obsolete. This would however be entirely unwarrantable. There are extremely few passages in the papyri of the earlier centuries A.D. in which an aoristic perfect is demanded, or even suggested, by the context. It is simply that a preference grows in popular speech for the expression which links the past act with present consequences.” A casual . example from the prince of Attic writers
Used in place _. τς of Aorist, Will show that this is not only a feature of late reek. Near the beginning of Plato’s Crito, Socrates explains his reason for believing that he would not die till the third day. “This I infer,” he says in Jowett’s English, “ from a vision which I had last night, or rather only just now.” The Greek, however, is τεκμαίρομαι ἔκ τινος ἐνυπνίου, ὃ ἑώρακα ὀλίγον πρότερον ταύτης τῆς νυκτός, where point of time in the past would have made εἶδον as inevitable as the aorist 1s in English, had not Socrates meant to em- phasise the present vividness of the vision. It is for exactly the same reason that ἐγήγερται is used with the point of time in 1 Co 15* (see above). So long as the close connexion of the past and the present is maintained, there is no difficulty whatever in adding the note of time. So in Rom 16’ we have to say either “ who were in Christ before me,” or (much better) “who have been in Christ longer than I.” A typical parallel from the papyri may be seen in OP 477 (ii/a.D.) τῶν τὸ πέμπτον ἔτος... epnBeveotwy—a fusion of “ who came of age in” and “who have been of age since the fifth year.” Now, if the tendency just described grew beyond a certain limit, the fusion of aorist and perfect would be complete. But it must be observed that it was not the perfect which survived in the struggle for existence. In MGr the old perfect forms only
survive in the passive participle (with reduplication syllable @See pp. 247 f.
1412 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
lost), and in the -«a which was tacked on to the aorist passive (ἐδέθηκα for ἐδέθην) : there is also the isolated εὕρηκα or βρῆκα (Thumb, Handb. 94), aoristic in meaning. It does not appear that the perfect had at all superseded the aorist —though in a fair way to do so—at the epoch when it was itself attacked by the weakening of reduplication which destroyed all chance of its survival as a distinct form, in competition with the simpler formation of Ultimate decay . . of the Perfect, [86 aorist. But these processes do not fairly set in for at least two centuries after the NT was complete. It is true that the LXX and inscrip- tions show a few examples of a semi-aoristic perfect in the pre-Roman age, which, as Thumb remarks (Hellenismus, p. 153), disposes of the idea that Latin influence was work- ing; cf Jannaris, ὃ 1872. But it is easy to overstate their number.* Thus in Ex 32! κεχρόνικε is not really aoristic (as Thumb and Jannaris), for it would be wholly irregular to put an aorist in oratio obliqua to represent the original present or perfect “Moses is tarrying” or “has tarried”: its analogue is rather the ypovifer of Mt 24. Nor will it do to cite the perfects in Heb 11” al (see pp. 129, 143 ff), where the use of this tense to describe what “stands written ” in Scripture is a marked feature of the author's style:° cf Plato, Apol. 280, ὅσοι ἐν Τροίᾳ τετελευτήκασιν, as written in the Athenians’ “ Bible.” In fact Mt 13% πέπρακεν καὶ nyopa- σεν is the only NT example cited by Jannaris which makes any impression. (I may quote in illustration of this OP 482 (ii/a..) χωρὶς ὧν ἀπεγραψάμην Kal πέπρακα.) The distinction is very clearly seen in papyri for some centuries. Thus τῆς γενομένης καὶ ἀποπεπεμμένης γυναικός NP 19 (ii/a.p.), “ who was my wife and is now divorced”; ὅλον τὸν χαλκὸν [δεδα]πάνηκα εἰς αὐτώ BU 814 (iii/a.D.), where an erased é- shows that the scribe meant to write the aorist and then substituted the more appro- priate perfect. As may be expected, illiterate documents show confusion most: eg. OP 528 (ii/A.D.) οὐκ ἐλου- σάμην οὐκ ἤλιμε ( = ἤλειμμαι) μέχρει ιβ ᾿Αθύρ. It is in the combinations of aorist and perfect that we naturally look first for the weaken- ing of the distinction, but even there it often appears clearly drawn. At the same time, we may find a writer like Justin a> See p. 248,
Perfect and Aorist used together.
THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 148
Martyr guilty of confusion, as in Apol. i. 22 πεποιηκέναι... ἀνεγεῖραι, 32 ἐκάθισε καὶ εἰσελήλυθεν, 44 νοῆσαι δεδύνηνται καὶ ἐξηγήσαντο. Other aoristic perfects may be seen in 60 ἐξῆλθον ... καὶ γεγόνασι, 62 ἀκήκοε... καὶ... ἔλαβε, ii. 2 πεποίηκε... καὶ... ἐκολάσατο, οἴο. 6 may compare from the LXX such a mixture as Is 53° érpavparicOn ... μεμαλάκισται (aor. in A). The NT is not entirely free from such cases: cf Mt 13% (above). In Jn 3° ἑώρακεν and jxoveev—contrast 1 Jn 1’—is explained by Blass as due to the greater stress laid on the seeing. Mk 5” ὅσα... σοι πεποίηκεν καὶ ἠλέησέν σε shows the proper force of both tenses. In Lk 4 it seems best, with Nestle and Wellhausen, to put a stop after ἔχρισέ με, so that ἀπέσταλκε is the governing verb of all the infinitives, and is not parallel with ἔχρισε. Ac 21%, εἰσήγαγεν καὶ κεκοίνωκεν, needs no explaining. To Rev 3° 5’ and 8° we must return later. There are other places where aorist and perfect are used in the same context, but they do not belong to this category of aorist and perfect joined with καί and with identical subject. When the nexus is so close, we might fairly suppose it possible for the tenses to be contaminated by the association, even where a perfect would not have been used aoristically by itself. But there are evidently no NT exx. to place by the side of those from Justin, except Mt 13 and the passages from Rev. (See further p. 238.) We come then to the general question of Aoristic the existence of aoristic perfects in the NT Perfects in NT? “7S Ρ ion It is a question which must be settled on its merits, without any appeal to the @ prior, for aoristic perfects may certainly be found in and even before the epoch of the NT writings. We are entirely at liberty to recognise such perfects in one writer and deny them to another, or to allow them for certain verbs and negative the class as a whole. Among the authorities we find Blass (p. 200) admitting them for Rev and most sparingly in other places. Even less concession is made by W. F. Moulton (WM 840 n.). Burton (MT 44) allows rather more, but says, “The idiom is confined to narrow limits in the NT.” The extremely small proportion of even possible exx. will naturally prevent us from accepting any except under very clear necessity. We begin by ruling out the alleged exx. from Heb (78 9% 11}
144 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
11%), since they are obviously covered by the author’s wsus loquendt described above (p. 142). Some isolated cases may also be cleared out of the way. Lk 986 ἑώρακαν seems to be virtually reported speech: ἃ ἑωράκαμεν takes this form regularly in orat. obl., which the form of this sentence suggests. In Jas 1%, κατενόησεν καὶ ἀπελήλυθεν καὶ εὐθέως ἐπελάθετο, the aorist expresses two momentary acts, which are thrown into narrative form, and the perfect accurately describes the one action with continuance. In Ac 7%, ἀπέσταλκεν, with the forest of aorists all round, is more plausibly conformed to them, and it happens that this word is alleged to have aoristic force elsewhere. But, after all, the abiding results of Moses’ mission formed a thought never absent from a Jew’s mind. Then there is an important category in which we are liable to be misled by an unreal parallelism in English. Burton rightly objects to our deciding the case of νυχθήμερον ἐν τῷ βυθῷ πεποίηκα (2 Co 11”) by the easy comment that it “goes quite naturally into English” (Simcox). But it does not follow that we have here a mere equivalent for ἐποίησα. That would only place the experience on a level with the others: this recalls it as a memory specially vivid now. There is in fact a perfect of broken as well as of unbroken continuity: in the graph “4...5;...58,” which leads from a past moment to the moment of speech, the perfect will tolerate the company of adjuncts that fasten attention on the initial point (as in Rom 16’, above) or on some indeterminate point in its course (as here), or on several points in its course. Cf Lucian Pisce. 6 ποῦ yap ἐγὼ ὑμᾶς bRpixa;—Plato Theet. 1448 ἀκήκοα μὲν τοὔνομα, μνημονεύω δ᾽ οὔ (see Goodwin MT § 46)—BU 168 (ii/A.D.) φασὶ οἱ παρόντες ἐκεῖνον μᾶλλον (? “often ἢ) τοῦτο πεποιηκέναι, καὶ γὰρ ἄλλοι ὡς πληγέντες ὑπὸ αὐτοῦ ἀναφόριον δεδώκασι. To this category belong perfects with πώποτε, 88 Jn 118 587 8.88. and such cases as 2 Co 12”, ὧν ἀπέσταλκα, “of those whom (from time to time) I have sent.” That the aorist is very much com- moner in this delineation of repeated action is obvious ; but that does not prevent the use of the perfect when the additional thought is presented of a close nexus with the present time.
We turn finally to the residuum of genuinely aoristic
π- τσ =
THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 145
perfects, or those which have a fair claim to be thus regarded. First, we may frankly yield those alleged for Rev, viz. 57 and 8° εἴληφεν (and by consequence probably 88 11” and 257), 74 and 198 εἴρηκα (-av). Since these are without apparent reduplication, they may well have been actual aorists in the writer's view: Bousset remarks how little Rev uses ἔλαβον. Secondly, we have Ἔ ἔσχηκα in 2 Co 2:8 19 75, Rom 52*—outside oxnka. . .
Paul only in Mk 5%, We must, I think,
treat all the Pauline passages alike, though Blass believes the perfect justifiable except in 2 Co 2.8, It seems clear that an aorist would suit all four passages, and in the first of them it seems hopeless to squeeze a natural perfect force into the Greek:! an aorist would suit Mk l/c. perfectly, but that matters less. Now, if we may take them altogether, we can see an excellent reason why ἔσχηκα should have been used as an aorist. There is no Greek for possessed, the constative aorist, since ἔσχον is almost (if not quite) exclusively used for the ingressive got, received. “Eoyov occurs only 20 times in the NT, which is about 3 per cent. of the whole record of ἔχω. There is not one place where ἔσχον must be constative: Jn 418 may be rendered “thou hast espoused ”— as in Mk 12”, the forming of the tie is the point. The NT does not contravene Dr Adam’s dictum (p. 49 of his notes on Plato’s Apology) that “the aorist means got, acquired, not had.” The similarity of ἔσχηκα to the aorists ἔθηκα and ἀφῆκα gave a clear opening for its appropriation to this purpose, and the translation “possessed” will suit the case throughout. We thus get in the required aoristic perfects in Rev and in Paul without sacrificing a principle. Passing over πέπρακα (Mt 13“), where the absence of an aorist from the same root may have something to do with the usage, we come to the perplexing case of yéyova. Its affinities would naturally be with the present, and there seems small reason for letting it do the work of the common ἐγενόμην. Yet even Josephus
In Rev.
Πέπρακα. Γέγονα.
1 Plummer (CGT in loc.) says, “48 in 1°, the perfect shows how vividly he recalls the feelings of that trying time”: so Findlay. This means applying what is said above on πεποίηκα in 2 Co 11%. But is this natural, when the coming of Titus with good news had produced ἄνεσις socomplete? (See p. 238.)
tO α See p. 248.
146 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
(c. Apion. 4. 21) has ὀλίγῳ πρότερον τῆς Πεισιστράτοι τυραννίδος ἀνθρώπου γεγονότος, “who flourished a little before P.” From the papyri we may cite two exx. (both from ii/a.p.). OP 478, “I declare that my son ... has reached (προσβεβηκέναι) the age of 13 in the past 16th year of Hadrian ... and that his father was (γεγονέναι) an in- habitant .. . and is now dead (τετελευτηκέναι). BU 136 διαβεβαιουμένου tod Π. μὴ γεγονέναι τὸν πατέρα τῆς ἐκδικουμένης ὀνηλάτην.. Now there are ποῦ ἃ few NT passages in which it is far from easy to trace the distinct perfect force of yéyova, and exx. like those above make it seem useless to try. But aoristic sense is not really proved for any of the 45 NT passages in which γέγονα (indic.) occurs, and im the great majority it has obviously present time. Lk 1055 and Jn 6* are unpromising for our thesis. But the first has the vivid present of story-telling—‘“ seems to have shown himself neighbour.” The second —inevitably translated “when camest thou hither ?”—is only another instance of the perfect with point of time, dealt with already: it is the combination of “when did you come?” and “how long have you been here?” ‘The aoristic use of yéyova is said by Burton to be general in Mt: Blass only admits it in 25°, Even this last is more like a historic present. The remaining passages mostly belong to the formula which tells us that the abiding significance of an event lies in its having been anticipated in prophecy. In general, it would appear that we can only admit a case of the kind with the utmost caution. K. Buresch, in his valuable article “Téyovav” (RAM 1891, pp. 193 ff.), noting an example of aoristic γεγόνασι in Plato (?) Alcib. 1244,! observes that this is never found in Greek that is at all respectable. In later Greek, he proceeds, the use of yéyova greatly increases. “It has present force always where it denotes a state of rest, preterite force where it denotes becoming. Hence in innumerable cases it is quite an equivalent of εἰμί, as with emstiti, factus or natus sum, vent, ete.” (p. 231 n.). It may be doubted however whether this canon will adequately account for the exx. from Josephus and the papyri with which we began.
Since the earliest period of Greek, certain perfects pos-
1 But see below, p. 238.
THE VERB:. TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 147
sessed a present meaning, depending upon the mode of action belonging to the root, and on that exhibited in the present. Thus the markedly conative present πείθω, “apply persuasion,” with its new per- fect πέπεικα and aorist ἔπεισα to match, kept its ancient perfect πέποιθα, which is intransitive (like most early perfects—see below, p. 164), with meaning J trust. Monro’s account of the Perfect in its Homeric stage of development may be quoted: “If we compare the meaning of any Perfect with that of the corresponding Aorist or Present, we shall usually find that the Perfect denotes a permanent sfate, the Aor. or Pres. an action which brings about or constitutes that state. Thus, ... ὥλετο was lost, ὄλωλε is undone. . . . Thus the so-called Perfecta presentia,
. ἕστηκα, .. . μέμνημαι, πέποιθω, οἶδα, ἔοικα, κέκτημαι, etc., are merely the commonest instances of the rule... Verbs expressing sustained sounds ... are usually in the Perfect " (HG 31). This last remark explains κέκραγα, which has survived in Hellenistic, as the LXX seems to show decisively. W. F. Moulton (WM 342 n.) says, “In Jn 1% hath cried seems the more probable meaning,” observing that the pres. κράξω is rare in classical writers. It is common in NT, a fact which probably weighed with him in making κέκραγεν a normal perfect. But the LXX, when exx. are so numerous and well distributed, must certainly count as evidence for the vernacular here; and when we find κέκραγα 14 times, sometimes indisputably present, and never I think even probably perfect—cf esp. Ps 141(140)! πρὸς σὲ ἐκέκραξα «ον. πρόσχες TH φωνῇ τῆς δεήσεώς μου ἐν τῷ κεκραγέναι pe πρὸς σέ (Heb. '81232); and Job 30”, where κέκραγα translates the impf. 3208 , it is difficult to suppose the word used asa true perfectin NT. It has not however been “ borrowed from the literary language in place of the Hellenistic κράξει" (Blass 198). Kpafm has its own distinction as a durative —cf Ps 32(31)8 ἀπὸ τοῦ κράζειν με ὅλην τὴν ἡμέραν: and κέκραγα, With κεκράξομαι and ἐκέκραξα, may well have been differentiated as expressing a single cry. In any case we cannot treat the LXX as evidence for the literary character of the survival. One may doubt the necessity of putting ἤλπικα and πέπεισμαι into this category; but τέθνηκα
Perfects with Present Force.

1418 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
naturally belongs to it; and ἥγημαι in Ac 26? (contr. Phil 37) is one of the literary touches characteristic of the speech before Agrippa: see Blass in loc. (See further p. 238.) The Pluperfect. . The Pluperfect, which throws the Perfect into past time, was never very robust in Greek. It must not be regarded as a mere convenience for expressing relative time, like the corresponding tense in English. The conception of relative time never troubled the Greeks; and the aorist, which simply states that the event happened, is generally quite enough to describe what we like to define more exactly as preceding the time of the main verb. A typical case of a pluperfect easily misunder- stood is Lk 8”, which we referred to on Ὁ. 75 in connexion with the concurrent ambiguity of πολλοῖς χρόνοις, and again (p. 113) in connexion with the perfectivising force of σύν. Since vernacular usage so clearly warrants our rendering the former “for a long time,’ we are free to observe that to. render “ oftentimes it had seized him” (RV text) involves a decided abnormality. It would have to be classed as the past of the “ perfect of broken continuity ” which we discussed above (p. 144) on 2 Co 11”. But it must be admitted that the extension of this to the pluperfect is complex, and if there is a simple alternative we should take it; RVmg is essen- tially right, though “held fast” would be better than “seized.” We need not examine further the use of this tense, which may be interpreted easily from what has been said of Perfect action. It should be noted that it appears sometimes in conditional sentences where an aorist would have been pos- sible: eg. 1 Jn 219 μεμενήκεισαν dv. The pluperfect expresses the continuance of the contingent result to the time of speak- ing. In Mt 127 ἐγνώκειτε is virtually an imperfect to a present ἔγνωκα, in which the perfect form has the same rationale as in οἶδα; and in Jn 1911 ἐδόθη 1 would have only pictured the original gift and not the presence of it with Pilate at the moment. | Last comes the Future. The nature of its action may be looked at first. This may be examined in the history of its form. Its
The Future :— Its Action.
1 On the periphrastic pluperfect, ἣν δεδομένον, see pp. 225 ff.
THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 149
close connexion with the sigmatic aorist act. and mid., and the two aorists pass., is obvious. Except in the passive, in fact, the future was mainly a specialised form of the aorist subjunctive. As such it will naturally share the point action of the aorist. We cannot however decisively rule out the possibility that another formation may have contributed to the Greek future, a formation which would be originally linear in action. The Aryan (Indo-Iranian) and Letto-Slavonic branches of the Indo-Germanic family have a future in -syé, which however was very moderately developed in these con- tiguous groups before they separated. Greek, geographically contiguous with Aryan on the other side in prehistoric times, may have possessed this future; but the existing Greek future can be very well explained without it, though it might be safest to allow its probable presence. In any case there is no question that the action of the Future is in usage mixed. “A€o is either “I shall lead” or “I shall bring "—the former durative, the latter effective. Thus in Mk 14” προάξω ὑμᾶς is probably “I shall go before you,” while ἄξων (Ac 22°) “to bring,” and ἄξει (1 Th 415) “he will bring,” refer to the end of the action and not its progress. An ingressive future may probably be seen in ὑποταγήσεται, 1 Co 15%: the τότε seems to show that the Parousia is thought of as initiating a new kind of subordination of the Son to the Father, and not the per- petuation of that which had been conspicuous in the whole of the mediatorial won. The exposition of this mystery must be taken up by the theologians. We pass on to note another example of the ingressive future, to be found in Jn 8%, ᾿Ελευθεροῦν appears to be always punctiliar in NT, but it is not necessarily so: cf Sophocles O7 706 τό γ᾽ eis ἑαυτὸν Tay ἐλευθεροῖ στόμα, “as for himself, he keeps his lips wholly pure” (Jebb). (It is true Sir R. Jebb uses “ set free” in his note, but the durative force of his translation seems more suitable.) Τῦ 18 therefore noteworthy that in ν. 38 we have the paraphrase ἐλεύθεροι γενήσεσθε, to bring out the (ingressive) point action of the future that precedes. Some- times the possession of two future forms enabled the language to differentiate these meanings. Thus ἔξω was associated
1 See Giles, Manual? 446-8.
150 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
with ἔχω, and meant “I shall possess”; σχήσω with ἔσχον, and so meant “I shall get.”1 There is one possible ex. in NT: in 1 Pet 418 φανεῖται may well be durative as in Attic—note the durative σῴζεται preceding it in the same clause; while φανήσεται (Mt 2439) has obviously point action. See the classical evidence marshalled in Kiihner-Gerth i. 114 ff, 170 ff.: add the note in Giles, Manual? 483 n. Since Hellen- istic generally got rid of alternative forms—even σχήσω is entirely obsolete,—this distinction will not be expected to play any real part in NT Greek. Indeed even those futures which by their formation were most intimately connected with the aorist, such as φοβηθήσομαι (for which Attic could use a durative φοβήσομαι), exercised the double mode of action which was attached to the tense as a whole: cf Heb 135%, where “be afraid” (durative) seems to be the meaning, rather than “become afraid.” This question settled, we next have
., to decide between shall and will as the Shall and Will. appropriate translation. The volitive future involves action depending on the will of the speaker or of the subject of the verb: in J will go, you shall go, it is the former ; in will you go? it is the latter. Side by side with this there is the purely futuristic we shall go, they will go. It is impossible to lay down rules for the rendering of the Greek future—the case is almost as complicated as are the rules for the use of shall and will in standard English. Not only are the volitive and the futuristic often hard to distinguish, but we have to reckon with an archaic use of the auxiliaries which is traditional in Bible translation. For instance, in such a passage as Mk 134% we have shall seven times where in modern English we should undeniably use will. But in v.% (“the same shall be saved”) the substitution of will is not at all certain, for the words may be read as a promise (a volitive use), in which shall is correct.2, Speaking generally, it may fairly be claimed that
1See Brugmann, Kurze vergl. Gramm. 568, for this as seen in καλῶς σχήσει and καλῶς ἕξει : also his Gr. Gram.® 480.
2 The use of shad when prophecy is dealing with future time is often par- ticularly unfortunate. I have heard of an intelligent child who struggled under perplexity for years because of the words ‘‘ Thou shalé deny me thrice:” it could not therefore be Peter’s fault, if Jesus commanded him! The child’s
THE VERB: TENSES AND MODES OF ACTION. 151
unless volitive force is distinctly traceable from the context, it would be better to translate by the futuristic form. The modernising of our English NT in this respect would involve the sacrifice of a very large number of shalls in the 3rd person, for our idiom has changed in many dependent clauses, in which neither shall nor will is any longer correct. In Mk 1415, for example, we should certainly say, “Follow him, and wherever he goes in... .” It is one of the points in which modernising is possible without sacrificing dignity —a sacrifice only too palpable in the various attempts to render the NT into twentieth century English. We are still waiting for our English Lasserre. What remains to be said about the Moods ofthe Fuoture will most appropriately come in when ure. . we discuss categories such as Commands and Prohibitions, Conditional Sentences, etc. It will suffice to remark here that the moods of the Future have in Hellenistic Greek receded mostly into their original non-existence, as experiments that proved failures. The imperative and sub- junctive never existed: a few lapsus calami like καυθήσωμαι, or analogically formed aorist subjunctives like ὄψησθε, δώσῃ (WH App 172), will not be counted as efforts to supply the gap. The optative, which only performed the function of oraé. obi. substitute for fut. indic., has disappeared entirely. The infinitive, originally limited in the same way, except for the construction with μέλλω, has shrunk very considerably, though not obsolete. With μέλλω it is only found in the word ἔσεσθαι. The innumerable confusions in the papyri, where a future form often is a mere blunder for an aorist, show that the tense was already moribund for most practical purposes : see Hatzidakis 190 ff Finally the participle, the only modal form which may claim prehistoric antiquity, retains a limited though genuine function of its own. The volitive force (here final or quasi-final) is the commonest, as Brugmann remarks,” and the papyri keep up the classical use ; but futuristic forms are not wanting—cf 1 Co 1657, Heb 3°, Ac 2033
determinism is probably more widely shared than we think ; and a modernised version of many passages like Mk 14%—+e.g. ‘‘ you will be renouncing me three times ”—would relieve not a few half-conscious difficulties.
1 Goodwin MT § 75. 3 Gr. Gram.* 496.
CHAPTER VII. THE VERB: VOICE.
THE phenomena of Voice in Greek present us with conditions which are not very easy for the modern mind to grasp. Active we know, and Passive we know, nor can we easily conceive a language in which either is absent. But nothing is more certain than that the parent language of our family possessed no Passive, but only Active and Middle, the latter originally equal with the former in prominence, though unrepresented now in any language save by forms which have lost all distinction of History of the meaning. What the prehistoric distinction Middle. was, we can only guess. It is suggestive that in the primitive type which is seen
in the Greek τίθημι---τίθεμαι, the principle of vowel-grada- tion (Ablaut) will account for -θε- as a weakening of -67-, and -pe as a weakening of -μαι, if we posit an accent on the root in one form and on the person-ending in the other. Such an assumption obviously does not help with τίθεμεν---- τιθέμεθα, nor with λύω----λύομαι; but if it accounts for part of the variation, we have enough to suggest a tentative inter- pretation of the facts. If such be the origin of the two forms, we might assume a difference of emphasis as the starting- point: in the active the action was stressed, in the middle the agent. We may illustrate this by the different emphasis we hear in the reading of the sentence in the Anglican liturgy which reminds the penitent of the Divine forgiveness. One reader says “He pardoneth,” wishing to lay all stress on the one Source of pardon, another “ He pardoneth,” the pardon itself heing the uppermost thought with him. We could easily suppose the former represented by ἀφίεται and the latter by ἀφίησι in a language in which stress accent is free to alter the weight of syllables as it shifts from one to another.!
1 See below, p. 238. 162
Voice :—

THE VERB: VOICE. 15
The Middle in Out of these postulated conditions, which Sanskrit, are of course the merest conjecture, we could readily derive the nuance which meets us in
the earliest accessible developments of Indo-Germanic speech. The Indian grammarians acutely named the active parasmat- pada and the middle aémane-pada, “a word for another” and “for oneself” respectively. Thus ydjate would be “ he sacrifices for himself,” while ydjatt, unless the dat. d/mane is present in the context, is.“ he sacrifices for another.” The essence of the middle therefore lies in its calling attention to the agent as in some way closely concerned with the action. The same characteristic is ultimately found in other languages. In Latin the middle has been some- what obscured formally by the entrance of the 7 suffix, which it shares with its most intimate relative, the Keltic branch. But this has not caused any confusion with the active ; so that the Latin,Greek, and Sanskrit middle voice may be put together, the differentia of Latin being that it has made no reserve like the Greek aorist and future middle, in lending its middle forms to the invading passive. In our inquiry into the » meaning conveyed by the middle, we naturally start with the verbs which are found in active only or middle only, to both of which classes the unsatisfactory name “deponent” should be given, if retained for either. Typical words not used in the middle, in the parent language, are the originals of our verbs eat, come, am, and the Greek δίδωμι (simplex) and few; while no active can be traced for véopat, ἕπομαι (= sequor), μαίνομαι, μητίομαι (= métior), κάθημαι, κεῖμαι The former class will be seen to denote “an action, an occurrence, or a state”; as likewise do the latter, but “ prevailingly such as take place in the sphere of their subject, the whole subject being concerned in the action.” Where the distinction is so fine, it is easily seen that many cases must arise in which we can no longer detect it, and are in danger of over-refining if we try. Our investigation must take account of the rather extensive categories in which one part of the verb affects the middle and another the active form. We
and in Latin.
4“ Deponents.

11 quote from Brugmann, Kurze vergl. Gramm. § 799, and mainly follow his account throughout this paragraph. ~
18 ΙΑ GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
have a number of cases in which the “strong” perfect active attaches itself in meaning to the middle, either figuring " among the parts of a verb which has no other Intransitive active forms, or siding with the intransitive Strong ᾿ τς . Perfects, middle where the rest of the active is transi- tive. So conspicuous is this, that the grammars
in which we learnt Greek thirty years ago actually gave “ réruma ”—the product, by the way, of an inventive imagina- tion—as the perfect middle of that highly irregular and defec- tive verb which in those days was our model regular.’ As | exx. of this attachment we may cite γέγονα from γίνομαι and ἐλήλυθα from ἔρχομαι, with ἀνέῳγα, ἑστάναι, ἀπόλωλα, σέσηπα, and πέποιθα as intransitive perfects from transitive verbs. Among the few remaining strong perfects occurring in the NT, we note ἀκήκοα, xéxpaya; πέπονθα, τέτ(εγυχα, and εἴληφα, as from verbs with a future middle. We have the defectives οἶδα, ἔοικα, and εἴωθα: and the two isolated actives ἐνήνοχα and γέγραφα remain the only real exceptions to the rule which finds some link with the middle in each of the relatively few survivors of the primitive perfect active. The list might perhaps be slightly extended from other vernacular Greek: thus ayjoya (dyeloya, ἀγέωχα) is found freely in papyri, and belongs to a purely active verb. The conjecture that the perfect originally had no distinction of active and middle, its person-endings being peculiar throughout, affords the most probable explanation of the facts: when the much later -xa perfect arose, the distinction had become universal. Parallel with this peculiarity, but much more extensive, is the category of middle futures attached to active verbs. As an abnormality for which no reason could be detected, it naturally began to suffer from levelling in Hellenistic, but is still prominent. We have in NT ἀκούσω as well as ἀκούσομαι, κράξω beside xexpa- ἕξομαι, γελάσω, ἐμπτύσω, ἀπαντήσω, διώξω, pevow, σπουδάσω,
Future Middle in Active sense.
1 In this the grammars followed ancient authority: thus Dionysius Thrax says, ‘‘ μεσότης δὲ ἡ ποτὲ μὲν ἐνέργειαν ποτὲ δὲ πάθος παριστῶσα, οἷον πέποιθα͵ διέφθορα, ἐποιησάμην, ἐγραψάμην."
2 The aorist ἦλθον is really due to the influence of a third constituent root in this defective verb.
δ Κεκράξομαι is only formally passive.
THE VERB: VOICE. 155
χωρήσω, ἐμπαίξω, ἁρπάσω, κλέψω, duaptnow—all these from the selected list of such verbs in Rutherford’s small grammar of Attic Greek, which supplies only about as many exx. of the preservation of the old future middle. (Some of these active futures, indeed, have warrant in classical Greek of other dialects than Attic, even from the Homeric period; but the list will sufficiently illustrate the weakening of this anomaly.) In spite of this, we still find in NT ὄψομαι, -βήσομαι, γνώσομαι, φάγομαι, ἀποθανοῦμαι, κομίσομαι and κομιοῦμαι, λήμψομαι, πίομαι, πεσοῦμαι, τέξομαι, φεύξομαι, which are enough to show that the phenomenon was anything but obsolete. Rutherford classes most of them as “verbs which denote the exercise of the bodily functions” or “intellectual or emotional activity”; and he would suggest that “the notion of willing implied in the future tense” may be the reason of the peculiarity. Brugmann connects it with the tendency of the strong aorist to be intransitive. This would naturally prompt the transitive use of the sigmatic aorist and consequently the future, so that the middle future attaches itself to the active intransitive forms. The explana- tion is only invoked for cases like βήσομαι, and does not exclude Rutherford’s suggestion. We may fairly take the existence of this large class of futures as additional evidence of a close connexion between the middle flexion and the stressing of the agent’s interest in the action of the verb. Use of the What has been said of the history of Middle: how the Middle prepares us for the statement farisit that this voice is quite inaccurately described reflexive? by empiric grammarians as essentially re- flexive. As a matter of fact, the proportion of strictly reflexive middles is exceedingly small. In NT we may cite ἀπήγξατο (Mt 275) as the clearest example, and a survival from classical Greek. But even here one may question whether the English intransitive choke is not a truer parallel than the reflexive hang oneself. It is curious that in Winer’s scanty list of exx. (WM 316), presumably selected as the most plausible, we have to discount all the rest. Aovoyaz accompanies its correlate νίπτομαι; and its one decisively middle form (ὗς λουσαμένη, 2 Pet 27) would raise diffi- culties if it occurred in a better Hellenist. Certainly, if the
1586 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
pig’s ablutions are really reflexive rather than passive, sundry current notions need revising. To our author at any rate λουσαμένη did not suggest willing co-operation. In citing κρύπτομαι (Jn 859), bonus dormitat Homerus: ἐκρύβη is not middle in form, nor does the verb show any distinct middle in NT. In παρασκευάσεται (1 Co 148) the intransitive prepare, make preparations, gives a better sense than the reflexive. We might bring in such an example as μὴ σκύλλου Lk 75, compared with the illiterate contemporary papyrus OP 295, μὴ σκλύλλε ἑατήν. But though no doubt a reflexive meaning ultimately accrued to the Middle, and in MGr almost drives other uses off the field, it would be wrong to suppose that it was originally there. If the active is transitive, the middle indicates that the action | goes no further than the agent himself, a sense which naturally comes out of the concentration on the agent characteristic of the middle. Thus νύπτομαν is “I wash,” with or without object, but implying that the action stops with myself. If then there is no object, νύπτομαι =“ I wash myself”: if there is, νέπτομαι τὰς yelpas=“I wash my Bearing of the bands.” This characteristic produced a passive Passive upon use of the middle, in Brugmann’s opinion, Theory of before the dialectic differentiation of Indo- Middle. Germanic speech. Intransitive use is a natural development from the fundamental idea of the middle; and from intransitive to passive is but a step. The well-known classical use of ἀποθνήσκει ὑπό τινος, as correlative to ἀποκτείνει tis, illustrates the development. It may seem to us strange that the same form should be used indifferently as active or passive in meaning—that, for example, ἐνεργουμένη in Jas 5'® should be translated “working” (RV) or “inwrought,’? with only the context to decide. Our own coincident transitive and intransitive,
1The rhythmical conclusion of the proverb suggests that it originated in an iambic line from comedy. Was 2 Pet citing from memory a verse the metrical nature of which he did not realise? If so, the original would of course not admit λουσαμένη---ἰῦ would run λελουμένη δ᾽ ὗς els κυλισμὸν βορβόρου, or λουθεῖσ ἅπαξ bs, or the like. But see below, p. 238.
2 See Mayor in Joc., and J. A. Robinson, Eph. 247. W. F. Moulton strongly favoured the second rendering. Why the Revisers did not give it even a marginal place, is hard to divine: it was there in their first revision.
THE VERB: VOICE. 157
however, is almost equally capable of producing ambiguity, or would be if it were not for the studied avoidance of ambiguity which is necessarily characteristic of an analytic language. “He who hides can find,” “ He who hides is safe,” exhibit the same form both as transitive and intransitive; and it would be easy to devise a context in which the second would become really ambiguous. The Middle From what has been said, it is clear that paraphrased the most practical equivalent of the Middle by Reflexive will generally be the active with the dative in Dative case. of the reflexive pronoun. This is in fact the nearest approach to a general statement which we can formulate, premising of course that it is rough in itself, and an exaggeration of the differentia. In mpocéyere ἑαυτοῖς (Lk 12'), “ pay attention for yourselves,” we have a phrase differing little from φυλάσσεσθε (ν.15), “be on your guard,” being only rather more emphatic. Mk 145 σπασά- μενος THY μάχαιραν is paraphrased by Mt (26°) ἀπέσπασεν τ. μ. αὐτοῦ : here, as in Ac 1414, where διαρρήξαντες τὰ ἱμάτια ἑαυτῶν replaces the more idiomatic διαρρηξάμενοι τὰ i, we see the possessive gen. expressing the same shade of meaning. Sometimes we find redundance, as when in Jn 195" διεμερίσαντο. . . ἑαυτοῖς stands against the unaccompanied ; verb in the same quotation Mt 27%, A few Typical typical illustrations of th 1 principl Middles:—  *YPical illustrations of the general principle | may be added. Προσκαλοῦμαι, “I call to myself,” is clear: its opposite ἀπωθοῦμαι, “I thrust away from myself,” is not really different, since ἀπωθῶ ἐμαυτῷ would show a legitimate dativus commodi. We have in fact to vary the exact relation of the reflexive perpetually if we are to represent the middle in the form appropriate to the particular example. Συνεβουλεύσαντο Mt 26* answers . to συνεβούλευσαν ἑαντοῖς, “they counselled Reciprocal, one another”: here we have the reciprocal middle, as in μάχεσθαι ᾿Εξελέγοντο Lk 147 “ they picked out for themselves,” and so “chose”: cf the distinction
1 Cf the closeness of ἀλλήλους and ἑαυτούς. Brugmann has some notes on this middle in Jndog. Forsch. v.114. Cf MGr νὰ παρηγορηθοῦμε, ‘‘ that we may comfort one another ” (Abbott 228, distich 56).
158 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
of aip® and αἱροῦμαι. Πείθειν is “to exercise suasion”: in the middle it keeps the action within the sphere of the agent, and consequently means “to admit suasion to oneself.” Xpopat, from the old noun χρή “necessity,” is “I make for myself what is necessary with something ”—hence the instrumental, as with the similar middle uéor in Latin. Less Dynamic easy to define are the cases of “dynamic” ’ middle, where the middle endings only emphasised the part taken by the subject in the action of the verb, thus vyyo and νήχομαι (not NT) “to swim.” The category will include a number of verbs in which it is useless. to exercise our ingenuity on interpreting the middle, for the development never progressed beyond the rudimentary stage. We need not stay to detail here the cases where the middle introduces a wholly new meaning. On the point of principle, it should however be noted that mental as opposed . to physical applications of the idea of the Mental Action. ναῷ ΜῈ] often be introduced in this way, since mental action is especially confined within the sphere of the agent. Thus καταλαμβάνω “ seize, overtake” (Jn 15 12%),
in the middle denotes mental “ comprehending,” as Ac 4:8, ΝΝ “On the whole the conclusion arrived at ete must be that the NT writers were perfectly
se of the . awe
Middle, Capable of preserving the distinction between the active and middle.” Such is the authori- tative summary of Blass (p. 186), which makes it superfluous for us to labour any proof. Differences between Attic and Hellenistic use in details are naturally found, and the un- classical substitutions of active for middle or middle for active are so numerous as to serve the Abbé Viteau for proof of Hebraism on a large scale. As Thumb remarks (Hellen- ismus 127), a mere glance into Hatzidakis’s Hinlettung—an indispensable classic, the absence of which from Viteau’s list of works consulted accounts for a great deal—would have shown him that in the Hellenistic period Greeks by birth were guilty of many innovations in the use of the voices which could never have owed anything to Hebrew. The NT exx. which Hatzidakis gives (pp. 195 ff.) are not at all in- consistent with the dictum of Blass quoted above. The sphere of the middle was, as we have seen, not at all sharply.

THE VERB: VOICE, 159
delimited, and usage inevitably varied in different localities and authors. There are plenty of middles in Attic, and even in Homer, in which the rationale of the voice is very hard to define. Naturally such words may have dropped a no longer intelligible distinction, just as popular Latin did in such words as seguor and wtor, while in other words the distinction may have been applied in a dif- ferent manner. We can see why γαμεῖσθαι -- πδογε fell out of use in Hellenistic:! even if a need was still felt for a separate word to suit the bride’s part in a wedding, the appropriateness of the middle voice was not clear, and the distinction was liable to lapse. The accuracy with which the middle was used would naturally vary with the writers’ Greek culture. Note for example how Mt and Lk correct the ἐφυλαξάμην (legem observare) of their source in Mk 1039, In Mk 2% they have removed another incorrect use, unless ὁδοποιεῖν is to be read there with B etc. (WHmg); for ὁδὸν ποιεῖν means “construct a road” (Gildersleeve Synt. 69), and the middle should have been used instead. In the less educated papyrographers we find blunders of this kind considerably earlier than the time when the more subtle meanings of the middle disappeared* As early as 95 B.c. we find ἐὰν αἱρῆτε and ἐὰν αἱρῆσθε used side by side for “if you like” (GH 36), and in the preceding century διαλύωμεν appears in the sense of διαλνώμεθα in LPe. These are of course sporadic, but some violations of classical usage have almost become fixed. This especially applies to the idiom- atic use of ποιεῖσθαι with a noun as substitute for a verb. Here the middle sense was not clearly discernible to the plain man, and ποιεῖν ‘invades the province of the middle very largely. We still have μνείαν ποιεῖσθαι (as in Eph 119) BU 632 (ii/A.D.), καταφυγὴν ποιεῖσθαι TP 5 (ii/i 8.0), BU 970 (ii/a.p.), ete. But the recurrent phrase τὸ προσκύ- νημά (cov) ποιῶ only once (Letronne 117) shows the middle; and Mt 6? π. ἐλεημοσύνην, Mk 15! συμβούλιον w.,2 Lk 187 π. ἐκδίκησιν, etc., will serve as specimens of a fairly large
—— τ’ ’-.-},Φ - -:9.͵Ψ’,͵’͵Ψ͵ Πρ ͵λ͵ἅ Σ᾽. —

1 Speaking generally : it survives in the legal language of marriage contracts as OP 496 (early ii/a.p.). [See p. 248,
2 Cf the modern phrase συμβούλιο γιὰ νὰ κάμουν ‘‘to consult,” of physiciang (Abbott 200). (On ποιεῖν in such phrases, cf Robinson, Eph. 172.)
160 <A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
class of usages, in which we cannot accuse the writers of ignorance, since the middle could. only defend itself by pre- scription. So when a new phrase was developed, there might be hesitation between the voices: συνᾶραν λόγον appears in Mt 18% 25, BU 775 (ii/a.p.), but the middle, as in FP 109 (i/a.p.), OP 113 (ii/a.D.), is more classical in spirit. In places however where an educated Hellenist like Paul. markedly diverges from the normal, we need not hesitate on occasion to regard his variation as purposed: thus ἡρμοσάμην 2 Co 11? fairly justifies itself by the profound personal interest the apostle took in this spiritual προμνηστική.
This is not the place for discussing, or even cataloguing, all the verbs which vary from classical norm in respect of the middle voice; but there is one special case on which we must tarry a little longer. The distinction between αὐτῶ and αἰτοῦμαι claims attention because of the juxtaposition of the two in Jas 4%, 1 Jn 5%, Mk 67% 108-33 (=Mt 207-2), The grammarian Ammonius (iv/a.D.) declares that αὐτῶ means to ask simpliciter, with no thought of returning, while αὐτοῦμαι involves only request for a loan. This remark serves as an | © example of the indifferent success of late writers in their efforts to trace an extinct subtlety. Blass (p. 186) says that αἰτοῦμαι was used in business transactions, αὐτῶ in requests of a son from a father, a man from God, and others on the same lines. He calls the interchange in Jas and 1 Jn Wee. “arbitrary ”; but it is not easy to understand how a writer like James could commit so purposeless a freak as this would be. Mayor in his note cites grammarians who made airoduas= ask μεθ᾽ ἱκεσίας, or μετὰ παρακλήσεως, which certainly suits the idea of the middle better than Ammonius’ unlucky guess. “When αἰτεῖτε is thus opposed to αὐτεῖσθε," Mayor proceeds, “it implies using the words, without the spirit, of prayer.” If the middle is really the stronger word, we can understand its being brought in just where an effect of contrast can be secured, while in ordinary passages the active would carry as much weight as was needed. For the alternation of active and middle in the Herodias story, Blass’s ingenious remark may be recalled, that “the daughter of Herodias, after the king’s declaration, stands in a kind of business relation to
Αἰτῶ and Αἰτοῦμαι.
THE VERB: VOICE. 161
him ἢ (p. 186 n.), so that the differentia of the middle cited above will hold.
Middle and Passive Aorists.
The line of demarcation between Middle and Passive is generally drawn by the help of the passive aorist, which is supposed to be a sound criterion in verbs the voice of which is doubtful. It should however be pointed out that historically this criterion has little or no value. The “strong” aorist passive in -ν is nothing but a special active formation, as its endings show, which became passive by virtue of its pre- ference for intransitive force. The -θὴν aorist was originally | developed, according to Wackernagel’s practically certain conjecture, out of the old aorist middle, which in non- thematic formations ran like ἐδόμην----ἐδόθης---ἔδοτο: when the thematic -co displaced the older -θης (Skt. -thds), the form ἐδόθης was set free to form a new tense on the analogy of the -ην aorist, which was no more necessarily passive than the identic formation seen in Latin habés, habet. Compare ἐχάρην from χαίρω (also χαίρομαι in MGr, by formal levelling), where the passive idea remained imper- ceptible even in NT times: the formally passive ἐκρύβη, from κρύπτω, in Jn 8° (cf Gen 310) will serve as an ex. of ἃ pure intransitive aorist from a transitive verb.2 In Homer (ef Monro HG 45) the -θην aorist is very often indistinguishable in use from the aorist middle; and it is unsafe to suppose that in later periods of the language the presence of an aorist in -@nv or -ν is proof of a passive meaning in a “ deponent” verb. Of course the -@nv forms, with their derivative future, were in the very large majority of cases passive; but it may be questioned whether there was markedly more passivity in the “feel” of them than there was in the present or perfect formations. For example, from ἀποκρίνομαι, “ answer,’ we have ἀπεκρινάμην in Attic Greek and predominantly in the papyri, while ἀπεκρίθην greatly outnumbers it in the NT; but the evidence noted above (p. 39) shows that the two forms were used concurrently in the Kown, and without
1So Ac 3°D: cf Trygaeus in Arist. Pax 291 (Blass).
3 To match these specimens of formal passives with middle meaning, we may cite middles in passive sense. Thus BU 1053, 1055 (i/s.0.) rd ἐν ὀφιλὴ θησόμενον, ‘‘the amount that shall be charged as due.” ᾿
Il
102 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
the slightest difference of sense. W.F. Moulton was inclined to see “a faint passive force . . . in most of the instances” of ἐστάθην in NT, though observing that it “is in regular use 88 an intransitive aorist” in MGr! (WM 315n.). He also suggested the possibility that ἐκοιμήθην in 1 Th 414 might be a true passive, “was put to sleep,” which gives a strikingly beautiful sense. A purely middle use of κοιμηθῆναι, “fell asleep,” is patent in such phrases as Ch P 3 ἡνίκα ἤμελλον κοιμηθῆναι ἔγραψα ἐπιστόλια B (iii/B.c.). The active κοιμᾶν however, though apparently dormant in classical prose,” revives in the LXX,as Gen 24". We may also compare the clear passive in FP 110 (i/a.p.) ἵνα τὰ πρόβατα ἐκεῖ κοιμηθῆε, “may be folded,” as the edd. translate. It seems possible therefore to conceive the passive force existing side by side with the simple intransitive, as apparently happened in ἐστά- θην (see note? below); but we cannot speak with confidence. Perhaps the matter is best summed up
Common . . Ground, with the remark that the two voices were not differentiated with anything like the same sharpness as is inevitable in analytic formations such as we use in English. We have seen how the bulk of the forms were indifferently middle or passive, and how even those which were appropriated to one voice or the other are perpetually crossing the frontier. Common ground between them is to be observed in the category for which we use the translation “submit to,” “let oneself be,” etc. Thus in Tb P 35 (ii/B.c.) ἑαυτὸν αὐἰτιάσεται, “will get himself accused,” is a middle; but in 1 Co 6’ ἀδικεῖσθε and ἀποστερεῖσθε are described as passives by Blass, who says that “‘to let’ in the sense of occasioning some result is expressed by the middle” (p. 185). The dividing line is a fine one at best. ’Arro- γράψασθαι in Lk 2° might seem to determine the voice of the present in νυ. 8, but Blass finds a passive in v.' Is
1"Kord6nxa is used as aor. to στέκω ‘‘stand,” and ἐστήθηκα to στήνω ‘‘place” (Thumb Handb. 92).
3 ΟΥ πορεύειν and φοβεῖν, which have entirely given up their active: we should hardly care to call πορευθῆναι and φοβηθῆναι passive. In MGr we have some exx. of the opposite tendency, as δαιμονίζω ‘‘drive mad” (Abbott 224, no. 47): in older Greek this verb is purely middle. See other exx. in Hatzi- dakis 198 f.
THE VERB: VOICE. 163
there adequate evidence for separating them? Formally ἀποκόψονται, Gal 5 (Dt 231), is middle,’ and so are βάπτισα: and ἀπόλουσαι, Ac 2216 (cf 1 Co 611 10%); but if the tense were present or perfect, could we decide? The verb ὑποτάσσω furnishes us with a rather important application of this question. What is the voice of ὑποταγήσεται in 1 Co 15%? Ts it passive—‘ be subjected” by as well as “¢o him that did subject all things to him”? Or is it middle—“be subject”? Findlay (ZG‘T in loc.) calls it “ middle in force, like the 2nd aor. pass. in Rom 10%, in consistency with the initiative ascribed to Christ throughout.” I incline to this, but without accepting the reflexive “subject himself,” which accentuates the differ- ence between the identical ὑποταγῇ and ὑποταγήσεται; the neutral “be subject” explains both, and the context must decide the interpretation. In Rom 108 the RV renders “ did not subject themselves,” despite the passive; and the reflexive is an accurate interpretation, as in ὑποτάσσεσθε Col 318, The question next presents itself whether we are at liberty to press the passive force of the aorist and future and perfect of éyeipw, when applied to the Resurrection of Christ. A glance at the concordance will show how often ἠγέρθην etc. are merely intransitive; and we can hardly doubt that ἠγέρθη, in Mk 168 and the like, translated op (cf Delitzsch). But if the context (asin 1 Co 15) strongly emphasises the action of God, the passive becomes the right translation. It is in fact more for the exegete than for the grammarian to decide between rose and was raised, even if the tense is apparently unambiguous: one may confess to a grave doubt whether the speaker of Greek really felt the distinction.*
1The verb must be similarly treated with reference to its voice, whether we translate with text or margin of RV. The various arguments in favour of the margin, to which the citation of Dt 7.c. commits us above, are now reinforced by Ramsay’s advocacy, Expos. for Nov. 1905, pp. 358 ff. He takes the wish rather more seriously than I have done (infr. 201) ; but I should be quite ready to go with Mr G. Jackson, in the same Expos., p. 878. See also Findlay in doc. (Exp. B 328 f.).
3 On the Passive, reference should be made to Wellh. 25f., for exx. showing how this voice was largely replaced by other locutions in Aramaic (especiaily the impersonal plural, p. 58 f. above), and consequently in Synoptic translations.
CHAPTER VIII Tue VERB: THE Moons.
THE Moods which we have to discuss will be the Imperative, Subjunctive, and Optative, and those uses of the Indicative which make it a “modus trrealis.” In this preliminary chapter we shall aim at evaluating the primary meanings of the Moods, leaving to the systematic grammar the exhaustive classi- fication of their uses, especially in dependent clauses. The moods in question are characterised by a common subjective element, representing an attitude of mind on the part of the speaker. It is not possible for us to determine with any certainty the primitive root-idea of each mood. The Imperative is tolerably clear: it represented command—-prohibition was not originally associated with it, and in Greek only partially elbowed its way in, to be elbowed out again in the latest developments of the language. The Subjunctive cannot be thus simply summarised, for the only certain predication we can make of its uses is that they all concern future time. We shall see that its force can mostly be represented by shall or will, in one of their various senses. Whether the Subjunctive can be morphologically traced to a single origin is very problematic. A possible unification, on the basis of ἃ common mood-sign -d-, was conjectured by the writer some years ago (AJP x. 285f.: see the summary in Giles, Manual? 460 n.). It is at least a curious coincidence that the mood-sign thus obtained for the Subjunctive should functionally resemble the -yé- under which the Optative can confessedly be unified. We are dealing with prehistoric developments, and it is therefore futile to speculate whether it would be more than a coincidence, should these two closely
allied moods prove to have been formed by suffixes which 164
The Moods in general.
THE VERB: THE MOODS. 165
make nouns of nearly identical function. However clearly the Optative may be reduced to a single formation, it gives us nevertheless no hope of assigning its meanings to a single root-idea: Optative and Potential, may and might in their various uses, defy all efforts to reduce them to a unity. In this book the discussion of the Potential might almost be drawn on the lines of the famous chapter on snakes in Iceland, but for literary survivals in the Lucan writings. (See pp.197 ff.) No language but Greek has preserved both- Subjunctive and Optative as separate and living elements in speech, and Hellenistic Greek took care to abolish this singularity in a fairly drastic way. It ought to be added, before we pass from this general introduction, that in a historical account of the Moods ἃ fourth, the Jnjwnctive, has to be interpolated, to explain certain phenomena which disturb the development of the others, and perhaps of the Indicative as well. The Injunctive was simply an imperfect or aorist indicative without the augment. Avov, λύεσθε, λύσασθε, λύθητε, λύετε, λύσατε and σχές will suffice as specimens, enough to illustrate how largely it contributed to the formation of the Imperative. syntactically it represented the bare combination of verbal idea with the ending which supplies the subject; and its prevailing use was for prohibitions, if we may judge from Sanskrit, where it still remains to some extent alive. The fact that this primitive mood thus occupies ground appropriate to the Subjunctive, while it supplies the Imperative ulti- mately with nearly all its forms, illustrates the syntactical nearness of the moods. Since the Optative also can express prohibition, even in the NT (Mk 1119», we see how much common ground is shared by all the subjective moods. Before taking the Moods in detail, we anlar tect must tarry a little over the consideration ἦν ay, Οἱ two important .particles which vitally affect their constructions, ἄν and μή The former of these is a very marked peculiarity of Greek. It is a kind of leaven in a Greek sentence: itself untranslatable, it may transform the meaning of a clause in which it is inserted. In Homer we find it side by side with another particle, «ev or xé (probably Aeolic), which appears to be somewhat weaker in. force: the later dialects generally
166 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
select one or the other for exclusive use. The general definition of its meaning is not very easily laid down. “Under the circumstances,” “in that case,” “anyhow,” may express it pretty well! The idiomatic use of “just,” common in Scotland, approximates to ἄν («év) very fairly when used in apodosis: ἐγὼ δέ κεν αὐτὸς ὅλωμαι, “ [1] jist tak her mysel’.” (See p. 239.) It had become stereotyped by the time we reach Hellenistic Greek, and we need not therefore trace its earlier development. Two originally connected usages are now sharply distinguished. In one, ἄν stands with optative or indicative, and imparts to the verb a contingent meaning, depending on an 7 clause, expressed or understood, in the context. In the other, the dy (in the NT period more often written éay—see pp. 42 f., 56) has formed a close contact with @ conjunction or a relative, to which it generally imparts the meaning -soever: of course this exaggerates the differentia in most cases. Here the subjunctive, invariable in Attic, does not always appear in the less cultured Hellenistic writers. How greatly this use preponderates in the NT will best be shown by a table 3 :----
"Av (ἐάν) with subj. (or indic. ) “Ay conditional, with verb. joined with relative or With indic. With opt.
conjunction. ee a Impf. Aor. Pluperf. Pres. Aor.
Mt . . . 55 1 7 0 0 0 Mk . . . 80 0 1 0 0 0 Lk . . . 28 2 4 0 3 1 \Ac . . . 10 0 1 0 3 2 Jn, 1Jn,3Jn . 15 7 7 1 0 0 (incl. ἤδειτε bis)
Rev . . . 5 0 0 0 0 0 Paul . ‘ . 27 3 3 0 0 0 Heb. . . 1 4 1 0 0 0 Jas. . . 1 0 0 0 0 0 Total . 172 17 24 1 6 3
1 Brugmann Gram. 499 gives ‘‘allenfalls, eventuell, unter Umstinden.”
2 The corresponding figures for the LXX will be instructive. A rough count in HR gives 739 as the total occurrences of ἄν (including κἄν), apart from édy=dy. Out of these 26 are with aor. opt. ; εἴη comes 3 times and ἔχοιμε once (in 4 Mac, an artificial work which supplies by itself 11 out of the exx. just noted) ; 22 can be classified asiterative ; 41 are with aor. indic., 6 with imperf. and 1 with pluperf. ; and 8 are abnormal (6 with relative and fut. indic., and 1 each with pres. indic. and fut. indic.). I have included all cases in which ἄν was read by any of the authorities cited in Swete’s manual edition.
THE VERB: THE MOODS. 167
The disproportion between these totals—172 and 51—would be immensely increased if ἐάν (if) and ὅταν were added. We shall see later (pp. 198 and 200) that the conditional ἄν is rapidly decaying. The other use, though extremely abundant in our period, falls away rapidly long before the papyri fail us; and even within the NT we notice some writers who never show it, or only very seldom. This prepares us for the ultimate disappearance of the particle except in composi- tion (MGr ἄν if, from the old ἄν ;1 σάν as or when, from ὡς av—see below; and κἄν even, used like the NT κἄν = καί, not affecting construction).
We proceed to mention a few miscellaneous points in the NT use of ἄν. There are three places in which the old uerative force seems to survive: Ac 2* and 455 καθότι ἄν τις χρείαν εἶχεν, and 1 Co 12? ὡς ἂν ἤγεσθεΣ “As you would be led (from day to day)” translates the last by an English iterative construction which coincides with the conditional, as in Greek: Goodwin MT § 249 pleads for a historical connexion of these two uses of ἄν. The aorist no longer appears in this construction as in classical Greek. Then we should note the appearance of ὡς ἄν in constructions which foreshadow the MGr idiom just mentioned.® Rom 15% is an interesting case, because of the present subjunctive that follows: “when I am on my way” (durative) transfers into the subjunctive the familiar use of present for future. In 1 Co 1133 it has the easier aorist, “ whenever I shall have arrived,’ and so in Phil 2%, In 2 Co 109, however, it means “as it were.”* ΜΟῚ ody has gone further, and takes the indicative as an ordinary word for when. The weakening of the connexion between compounds of dy and the sub- junctive is seen in the appearance of the indicative with
Iterative av.
ὡς ἄν.
1 On ἄν and ἐάν (if) in NT seo above, p. 48 n.
3 Winer (p. 884) would make all these parallel with the use of ὅπον dy ο.. indic. in Mk 6© and the like. I deal with the question below.
ὃ For vernacular evidence see Par P 26 (ii/B.c.—with gen. abs.), 46 (ii/B.c.— with sor. subj.); BM 20 (ii/p.c.) cuvératas ws ἂν cis Μέμφιν; OGIS 907 (ii/B.c.—the Rosetta Stone) ws ἂν. . . συνεστηκυίας, etc.
4 Both the exx. of ἄν c. partic. quoted by Winer (p. 378) are ws ἄν : add 2 Mac 124, I have noted one ex. of genuine ἄν ὁ. pte. in a Κοινή inser., ZA iii. 174 (A.D. 5) δικαιότερον ἃν σωθέντα.
|
168 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
ὅταν and ἐάν (if), and other words of the kind. So not infrequently in Mk, as 3" ὅταν ἐθεώρουν, 1135 ὅταν στήκετε, 1119 ὅταν ἐγένετο : add Rev 4° ὅταν δώσουσιν, 81 ὅταν ἤνοιξεν. Parallel with these are Mk 6° ὅπον ἄν εἰσεπορεύετο and ὅσοι ἄν ἥψαντο, Rev 144 ὅπου ἂν ὑπάγει (where however we are entirely free to spell ὑπάγῃ if we like). Since these are in the least cultured of NT writers, and include presents and futures as well as past tenses, we should hardly class them with the cases of iterative ἄν just given from well-educated writers such as Luke and Paul, though there is an obvious kinship. If ἄν added -ever to the force of a relative or con- junction, there seemed no reason to forbid its use with a past tense where that meaning was wanted. The papyri yield only a small number of parallels, showing that in general the grammatical tradition held) Thus BU 607 (11{4.}.) ὁπόταν ἀναιροῦνται, FP 126 (iv/ap.) ὅσ᾽ ἂν πάσχετε, Par P 26 (ii/B.C.) ὅταν ἔβημεν κατ᾽ ἀρχὰς eis TO ἱερόν (=merely when), BU 424 (ii/iii 4.0.) ἐπὰν ἐπυθόμην (also = when), BM 331 (ii/aD.) ὅσα ἐὰν παρελαβόμην. The tendency to drop the distinction of when and whenever® may be connected with the fact that ὁπότε is freely used for when in papyri—so the later uncials in Lk 6°, ‘Eayv with indica- tive is found in 1 Th 38 στήκετε, 1 Jn 5% οἴδαμεν, to mention only two cases in which indic. and subj. are not formally identical in sound. Winer quotes even ἐὰν ἦσθα, from Job 228 (jsA), and similar atrocities (as the Atticist would count them) from the Byzantine writers. We may add a selection from papyri:—Par P 18 ἐὰν μαχοῦσιν per ἐσοῦ. 62 (ii/B.c.) ἐάνπερ ἐκπληρώσουσιν. Th P 58 (ii/B.c.) ἐὰν δε. BU 546 (Byz.) ἐὰν οἶδεν. OP 237 (ii/av.) ἐὰν δ᾽ εἰσίν. AP 93 (ii/a.D.) ἐὰν φαίνεται. There are several exx. of ἐὰν ἦν, but in some cases it certainly stands for 7—for this curious recurrent phenomenon see notes in CR xv. 38, 436, and above, p. 49: I cannot therefore quote with certainty. (See further p. 239.)
The same lesson is taught by conjunctions which still take the subjunctive, though ἄν has been allowed to fall out. Itdoes not seem to make any difference whether éws or éws dv is written, and
so with many other compounds. Thus PP 13 (Ptol.) ὅσα @See p. 248.
Ὅταν, etc. c. indic.
"Av dropped from its compounds.
THE VERB: THE MOODS 169
ὀφείλωσίν τινες, CPR 24, 25 (ii/a.p.) ἐφ᾽ ὃν ἢ χρόνον, 237 ὅσα αὐτῷ προστέκηται, ΤΌ P 6 (ii/B.c.) ἕως μένωσι, GH 38 (i/B.c.) ἕως καταβῇς, OP 34 (ii/a.D.) μήτε διδότω... πρὶν αὐτῷ ἐπιστέλληται, etc., etc. The prevalence of this omission in the papyri with conjunctions meaning until (ἄχρι, μέχρι, μέχρι οὗ, ἕως, πρίν, πρὸ τοῦ, etc.), is paralleled in the NT: οὗ Mk 14%, 2 Pet 1, Lk 138, etc_—see the list in WM 371. With πρὶν (7), however, the ἄν occurs in the only place (Lk 256) where it is used with subjunctive.!
In 1 Co 75 μὴ ἀποστερεῖτε ἀλλήλους, εἰ μήτι ἂν [om. B, probably to ease a diffi- culty] ἐκ συμφώνου πρὸς καιρόν, we have a curious combina- tion which seems to be matched in the papyri.2 So BU 326 (ii/a.D.) εἴ τε ἐὰν ἀνθρώπινον md[ Oy], and εἴ τι ἐὰν μετὰ ταῦτα γεγραμμένα καταλίπω, “if I should leave a codicil”: the latter phrase is repeated subsequently without ἐάν in this rather illiterate will. OP 105 (ii/a.p.) εἴ τε ἄλλο αἰὰν (ἔγχω, FP 130 (iii/a.p.) εἴ τινος ἠὰν ypla σοί ἐστι. BM 233 (iv/a.D.) εἴ te ἄν ἁπαξαπλῶς dvadwons. These documents are too illiterate for illustrating Paul: some early scribe is more likely to be responsible than the apostle. Note that Origen quotes ἐὰν μήτι. This explanation (Deissmann’s) seems on the whole preferable to the alternative cited from Buttmann in WM 380 πη. Winer’s editor himself compared the ἄν to that in κἄν and ὡς ἄν which does not affect construction : οὗ Tb P 28 (ii/B.c.) εἰ κἄν δύναται.
More important still in its influence on the moods is the subjective negative μή, the distinction between which and the objective né (replaced in Greek by ov) goes back to the period of Indo-Germanic unity, and survives into the Greek of the present day. The history of μή has been one of continuous aggression. It started in principal clauses, te express prohibition. As early as Homer
Et μήτι ἄν.
Μή.
1 Luke once uses it with subj. and once with opt., both times correctly with a negative clause preceding (Lk /.c., Ac 25%). The papyrus writers are not so particular. Elsewhere in NT the infin. construction is found,
2 See Deissmann BS 201 n. He quotes BU 826, but will not allow that εἰ μήτι ἄν is a kind of analysis of ἐὰν μήτι, though this gives the meaning correctly. Blass’, p. 321, has not summarised him quite adequately, if I understand Deiss- mann correctly. The point is that ἄν is added to εἰ μήτι as it might be to ὅπου or ὅτε, meaning unless in a given case, wnless perhaps. See further p. 239.
170 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
μή had established itself in a large and complex variety of uses, to which we have to appeal when we seek to know the true nature of the modal constructions as we come to them. Since every Greek grammar gives the ordinary rules distinguishing the uses of οὐ and μή, we need not examine them here in their historical relationship: what must be said will come up best as we deal with the moods seriatum. But the broad differences between Hellenistic and earlier Greek in this respect raise questions affecting the moods as a whole, and especially the verb infinite. We must therefore sketch the subject briefiy here. .
The difference between ov and μή in the Blass's Canon. Kown of the NT becomes a very simple matter if we accept the rule which Blass lays down (p. 253). “ All instances,” he says, “ may practically be brought under the single rule, that οὐ negatives the indicative, μή the other moods, including the infinitive and participle.” In review- ing Blass, Thumb makes the important addition that in MGr δέν (from οὐδέν, which stepped into the place of οὐ, as we can easily understand from many of its adverbial uses in NT) belongs to the indicative and μή(ν) to the sub- junctive. The classical paper of Gildersleeve in the first number of his AJP (1880), on encroachments of μή upon οὐ in the later Greek, especially in Lucian, makes it very clear that the Attic standard was irrecoverable in Lucian’s day even by the most scrupulous of Atticists: cf the parallel case of the optative (below, p. 197). It is of course obvious that the ultimate goal has not been completely reached in NT times. Μή has not been driven away from the indicative. Its use in questions is very distinct from that of ov,! and is
1 Blass (p. 254 n.) thinks that μήτι in Jn 215 ‘hardly lends itself to the meaning ‘certainly not I suppose.’” But the tone of this word, introducing a hesitant question (as Jn 4”), is not really inappropriate. We often hear “1 suppose you haven’t got... on you, have you?” Moreover, the papyri show us that προσφάγιον is not so broad a word as ‘‘something to eat.” See my note, Expos. Vi. viii. 487, to which I can now add OP 736 and 738 (cir. A.D. 1). The apostles had left even ἄρτοι behind them once (Mk 816) : they might well have left the ‘‘relish” on this occasion. It would normally be fish; cf Mk 6%. (While speaking of Jn 2.6., I should like to add that the address Παιδία, ‘‘Lads!”, may be paralleled in MGr, 6.0. in the Klepht ballad, Abbott 42— παιδία μον and παιδία, to soldiers.) See further p. 239.
THE VERB: THE MOODS. 171
maintained in NT Greek without real weakening. M7 re. muins after εἶ ὁ. indic. in unfulfilled conditions, except in Mk 14% (and Mt). But in simple conditions εἰ od is common. Luke has 6, Jn 3, Paul 16, Jas 2, and Mt, Heb, 2 Pet, and Rev one each. Against this total of 31, we have 4 exx. of εἰ μή in simple conditions with. verb expressed, and three of these (1 Co 15%, 2 Co 13°, Gal 1”) are anything but normal: 1 1 Tim 6° is more ordinary, according to classical standards. Blass adds εἰ δὲ μὴ otdas from the agraphon in D at Lk 64. Ei μή is three times as common in NT as εἰ ov, but we soon see that it is restricted to three uses: (1) in protasis of unreal conditions ; (2) meaning except, much like πλήν ; (3) with δέ, meaning otherwise, without verb expressed. Lk 913, with a deliberative subjunctive following, is exceptional. Such being the facts, it is difficult to combat the assertion that εὖ οὐ came to be the norm;? though doubtless several of its exx. were correct according to classical standards, as in Rom 89, where a single word is negatived rather than a sentence. <A few survivals of μή in relative sentences pre- serve literary construction; so Ac 15% Ὁ, 1 Jn 48 (unless we desert the extant MSS for patristic evidence and read λύει, with WHmg and Blass) Tit 1", 2 Pet 1% A genuine example of the old distinction is traceable in the otherwise identic phrases of Jn 34 and 1 Jn 5°: the former states the charge, quod non crediderit, the latter the simple fact, quod non credidit. But it must be allowed that this is an isolated case! We will leave to the next chapter the only other excep- tion to Blass’s canon, the limited use of οὐ with the participle.
First among the Moods we take up the Imperative. It is the simplest possible form of the verb. “Arye the imperative of ἄγω, and ayé the vocative of ἀγός, are both of them interjections formed by isolating the root and adding no suffix—the thematic vowel e is now generally regarded as a part of the root rather than a suffix. In our own language, where nouns and verbs have in hosts of cases reunited through the disappearance of suffixes, we can represent this identity easily. “ Murder!”, in Russia or Armenia, might be either verb or noun—a general order to
The Imperative :—

1 See below, p. 239. 2 See p. 240.
172 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
soldiers charging a crowd, or the scream of one of the victims The interjection, as we might expect, was indifferently used for 2nd and 3rd person, as is still shown by the Latin agiio, Skt. ayatat, (= age + tod, the ablative of a demonstrative pro- noun, “from this (moment),” added to make the command more peremptory). How close is the kinship of the interjection and the imperative, is well shown by the demonstrative adverb δεῦρο, “hither,” which only needs the exclamation mark to make it mean “come here”: it even forms a plural δεῦτε in this sense. We shall recall this principle when we describe the use of the infinitive in commands,
There being in Greek a considerable variety of forms in which one man may express to another a wish that is to control his action, it will be necessary to examine the tone of that mood which is appropriated to this purpose. As we might expect from our own language, the imperative has a very decided tone about it. The context will determine how much stress it is carrying: this may vary from mere permission, as in Mt 8823 (cf ἐπέτρεψεν in the presumed source Mk 51%) or 1 Co 715, to the strongest command. A careful study of the imperative in the Attic Orators, by Prof. C. W. E. Miller (AJP xii. 399 ff.), brings out the essential qualities of the mood as used in hortatory literature. The grammarian Her- mogenes asserted harshness to be a feature of the imperative;} and the sophist Protagoras even blamed Homer for addressing the Muse at the beginning of the Jivad with an imperative.” By a discriminating analysis of the conditions under which the orators use the imperative, Miller shows that it was most avoided in the proem, the part of the speech where con- ciliation of the audience’s favour was most carefully studied ; and the criticism of Protagoras, which the ancients took more seriously than many moderns have done, is seen to be simply due to the rhetorician’s applying to poetry a rule that was unchallenged in rhetoric. Ifa cursory and limited observation may be trusted, the éthos of the imperative had not changed in the age of the papyri. Imperatives
Tone of Imperative.
1 Σχήματα δὲ τραχέα μάλιστα μὲν τὰ προστακτικά,
2 Ap. Aristotle Poetics ch. 19.

THE VERB: THE MOODS. 173
are normal in royal edicts, in letters to inferiors, and among equals when the tone is’ urgent, or the writer indisposed to multiply words: they are conspicuously few in petitions. When we come to the NT, we find a very different state of things. The prophet is not accustomed to conciliate his hearers with carefully softened commands; and in the imperial edicts of Him who “taught with authority,” and the ethical exhortations of men who spoke in His name, we find naturally a large proportion of imperatives. More- over, even in the language of prayer the imperative is at home, and that in its more urgent form, the aorist. Guilder- sleeve observes (on Justin Martyr, p. 137), “ As in the Lord’s Prayer, so in the ancient Greek liturgies the aor. imper. is almost exclusively used. It is the true tense for ‘instant’ prayer.” The language of petition to human superiors is full of δέομαι, καλῶς ποιήσεις, and various other periphrases whereby the request may be made palatable. To God we are bidden by our Lord’s precept and example to present the claim of faith in the simplest, directest, most urgent form with which language supplies. us.
The distinction between present and aorist imperative has been drawn already, to some extent, in the discussion of pro- hibitions ; for though the subjunctive has to be used in the aorist, it is difficult to question that for this purpose- the two moods hardly differ—the reason for the ban on py ποίησον lies buried in the prehistoric stage of the language. And whatever the distinction may be, we must apply the same essential principles to commands and _ prohibitions, which were felt by the Greeks to be logically identical categories: see Miller op. cit. 416. The only difference will be that the meaning of μὴ ποιήσης (above, pp. 122 ff.) comes from the future sense inherent in the subjunctive, while in estimating the force of ποίησον we have nothing but the aorist idea to consider. This, as we have often repeated, lies in the “point action” involved. In _ the imperative therefore the conciseness of the aorist makes it a decidedly more sharp and urgent form than the present. The latter may of course show any of the characteristics of linear action. There is the iterative, as in Lk 11%, the conative,
Tenses of Imperative.
—_
174 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
as in Mk 9% (“do not try to stop him, as you are doing”), Phil 2” (“set to working out”); and of course the simple durative passim. Writers differ in their preferences between the tenses. Thus 1 Pet shows a marked liking for the aorist, which he has 22 times in commands (2nd pers.), against 6 presents; on the other hand Paul has 9 presents to 1 aorist (apart from LXX citations) in Gal, and 20 to 2 in Phil. In Mt 5-7 the presents (still 2nd pers.) are 19 to 24, and in corresponding parts of Lk 21 to 16. In seven passages only do the two evangelists use different tenses, and in all of them the accompanying variation of phraseology accounts for the difference in a way which shows how delicately the distinction of tenses was observed. Mt 547= Lk 6”, and Mt 64%=Lk 11% we have dealt with. Mt 5!2 has continuous presents, following ὅταν c. aor. subj.: in Lk 6” a little more stress on the ingressive element in these aorists makes the addition ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ suitable, and this carries with it the aor. imper. In Lk 125° δός is natural with ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ: Mt 5% has ἔσθε εὐνοῶν, which is curious in view of ταχύ. But since εἰμί has no aorist, it is not surprising that its imperative is sometimes quasi-ingressive: cf Mk 5*, Lk 1911, and the phrase γνωστὸν ὄστω (Ac ter). The punctiliar στρέψον, turn, in Mt 5 answers well to the linear πάρεχε, hold out, offer, in Lk 6. The vivid phrase ἀγωνίζεσθε εἰσελθεῖν of Lk 13% may well preserve more of the original than the constative εἰσέλθατε of Mt 718, In all these cases we may reasonably see the effects of varying translation from Aramaic original, itself perhaps not wholly fixed in detail; but we see no trace of indifference to the force of the tenses. The remaining example is in a quotation from Ps 6°, in which Mt 7% preserves the LXX except in the verb ἀποχωρεῖτε, while Lk 1557 modifies the address to ἐργάται ἀδικέας : here it is enough to say that the meaning of ὦπο- χωρεῖτε imposes ἃ quasi-ingressive sense even on the present.
We have so far discussed only commands and prohibitions in the 2nd person. Not much need be added as to the use of the 3rd. Here the veto on the aorist in prohibition is with- drawn: we need not stay to ask why. Thus in Mt 6° μὴ γνώτω, 2417-18 μὴ καταβάτω... μὴ ἐπιστρεψάτω, which
Third Person Imperative.

THE VERB: THE MOODS. 175
all come under ordinary aorist categories. As in classical Greek, the 3rd person is naturally much less common than the 2nd. Though the ist person is not formally brought in under the Imperative, Person. it will be well to treat it here: a passage like Mk 14% ἐγείρεσθε ἄγωμεν shows that
logically it is fair to speak of three persons in the imperative mood, since ἄγωμεν only differs from ἐγείρεσθε in that the speaker is included with the objects of the command. That this should affect the tone of the command is of course Inevitable; but indeed all three persons necessarily differ considerably in the éhos they severally show. The closeness of connexion between this volitive subjunctive 1st person and the regular imperative is well seen in Sanskrit, where the Vedic subjunctive is obsolete in the epic period except for the 1st person, which stands in the grammars as an ordinary part of the imperative—tbhardma, bharata, bharantu, like φέρωμεν, φέρετε, φερόντων (Att.). In Hellenistic Greek the imperative 1st person is beginning to be differentiated from other subjunctives by the addition of ἄφες, ἄφετε, a use which has recently appeared in a papyrus of the Roman period (OP 413, ἄφες ἐγὼ αὐτὴν θρηνήσω), and has become normal in ΜΟῚ (ἄς with 1st and 3rd subj. making imperative). This is always recognised in Mt 74=Lk 6%: why not in 274=Mk 15% one has never been able to see. To force on Mt a gratuitous deviation from Mk seems a rather purposeless proceeding. Translating both passages simply “ Let us see,” the only difference we have left is in the speakers, which is paralleled by several similar variations (Hawkins HS 56 ff.). It is possible that Jn 12’, ἄφες αὐτὴν ἵνα tnpyon, has the same construction in the 3rd person, to be literally rendered like the rest by our auxiliary, “ Let her keep it.” (So practically RV text.) The alternative is “ Let her alone: let her keep it,” which is favoured by Mk 14°. The acc. αὐτήν, compared with the ἀγώ seen in OP 413, dis- courages our treating ἄφες as a mere auxiliary.2 We shall
Expressions
1 Πετήρηκεν (a-text) is a self-evident correction. 2 If we suppose the ri κόπους παρέχετε ; (durative) to indicate that Judas and the rest were trying to stop Mary, the ‘‘let her keep it” (τηρήσῃ constative)

176 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
be seeing shortly that ἵνα c. subj. is an imperative (iva εἴπῃς = MGr νὰ ᾿πῇς, say!). The word had not yet by any means developed as far as our ἰδέ, or its own MGr derivative ds. Note that it much more frequently takes the infin. (8 times in NT): other parts of the verb take infin. 7 times and iva c. subj. once (Mk 1118. Our own word helps us in estimating the coexistence of auxiliary and independent verb in the same word: in our rendering of Mt 74 “allow me” is the meaning, but to substitute “allow” for “let” in a phrase like “let us go” would be impossible. “Ades is “let” as in “do let me go,’ while MGr ds is the simple auxiliary.
The scanty relics of the Perfect Impera- tive need detain us very briefly. In the active it never existed, except in verbs whose perfect had the force of a present:? we find xexpayerwoay in LXX (Is 14%), but no ex.in NT. In the passive it was fairly common in 3rd person (periphrastic form in plural), expressing “a command that something just done or about to be done shall be decisive and final” (Goodwin). We have this in Lk 12%, The rare 2nd person is, Goodwin adds, “a little more emphatic than the present or aorist”: it shares, in fact, the characteristic just noted for the 3rd _ person. Cf πεφίμωσο Mk 439 with φιμώθητι 1%, The epistolary ἔρρωσο in Ac 23 (a-text), 15” (passim in papyri), does not come in here, as the perfect has present meaning.
We are ready now to look at the other forms of Command—we use the word as including Prohibition—which supplement the mood appropriated to this purpose. We shall find that forms of command can be supplied by all six moods of the verb—acquiescing for the moment in a convenient misuse of the term “mood,” to cover.all the subjects of this chapter and the next. The Future Indicative is exceedingly common in this sense.
Perfect Imperative.
Substitutes for Imperative :—
(1) Future Indicative ;
may be taken as forbidding interference with an act already begun. That the ἡμέρα τοῦ ἐνταφιασμοῦ was already come, is stated as much by the προέλαβεν of Mk 148 as by the phrase in Jn. The action of v.* is narrated completely (as it is by Mk), before the interruption is described.
1Thumb Handb. 100. 3 Goodwin M7 § 108.
THE VERB: THE MOODS. 177
It seems to come to it by two roads, as may be seen by the study of its negatives. A command like ov φονεύσεις, which can be seen in earlier Greek and becomes abundant in the Hellenistic vernacular, is proved by its ov to be a purely futuristic form. Such a future may have the tone of absolute indifference, as in the colloquial od ὄψῃ, “you will see to that,’ Mt 274. Or it may show that the speaker takes the tone of one who does not contemplate the bare possibility of disobedience. Thus in Euripides Med. 1320 χειρὶ & οὐ ψαύσεις ποτέ, “you will never be able to touch me,” shades into “you shall never touch me.” Against Winer’s remark (p. 397) that this form “was considered milder than the imperative,” we may set Gildersleeve’s emphatic denial. “A prediction may imply resistless power or cold indifference, compulsion or concession” (Synt. 116). We have also a rare form in which the negative μή proclaims a volitive future, in its origin identical with the μὴ ποιήσῃς type already dis- cussed. Demosthenes has μὴ βουλήσεσθε εἰδέναι, and μὴ ἔξεσται BU 197 (i/a.D.), μὴ ἀφήσις BU 814 (iii/a.D.), show its sporadic existence in the vernacular Koww7. Blass adds μηδένα μισήσετε from Clem. Hom. iii. 69.4 These passages help to demonstrate the reality of this rare form against Gildersleeve’s suspicions (Synt. 117). Yet another volitive future is seen in the imperatival use of the future with οὐ in a question: Ac 13% οὐ παύσῃ διαστρέφων; Prediction and Command approximate in the NT use of ov μή (see below, pp. 187 ff.), which in Mt 155, Lk 1%, Jn 13°, Gal 4°, and possibly elsewhere, is most naturally classed as imperatival. (2) Subjunctive ; Next among these forms of command comes
᾿ the subjunctive, already largely dealt with. So we have had the 1st person, as Jn 1431: ἄγωμεν, Gal 576 μὴ γινώμεθα. The future and the imperative between them carried off the old jussive use of the subjunctive in positive commands of 2nd and 3rd person. The old rule which in (“ Anglicistic”) Latin made sileas! an entirely grammatical retort discourteous to the Public Orator’s sileam ?
1 Τὸ this class I should assign the use of ὅπως 6. fat. =imper., as in Plato 337B ὅπως μοι μὴ ἐρεῖς, don't tell me: ὅπως is merely a conjunction, ‘‘in which case.” Though common in colloquial Attic, it is ousted in Heliemistic by ἵνα : note however BU 625 (ii/iii A.D.) διὸ ὅπως ἐνταλῇς. (Seo p. 240.)
12 α See p. 248.
178 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
—which in the dialect of Elis produced such phrases as ἐπιμέλειαν ποιήᾶται Nixodpopop, “let Nicodromus attend to it ” 1—-has no place in classical or later Greek, unless we admit as an ex. one line of Sophocles, much beloved of examiners.? We have dealt already with μὴ ποιήσῃς, the historical equi- valent of the Latin ne feceris. In the 3rd person the sub- junctive is little used: 1 Co 161, 2 Co 1116. 2 Th 25 are exx. The tone of these clauses is less peremptory than that of the imperative, as may be seen from their closeness to the clauses of warning. Such μή clauses, with subj.—rarely future (as in Col 28, Heb 9:12), which presumably makes the warning somewhat more instant—are often reinforced by épa, βλέπε, or the like. It must not be supposed that the μή clause historically “depends on” this introductory word, so that there is an ellipsis when it stands alone. Even where the apparent governing verb is a real independent word and not a mere auxiliary—eg. in Mk 14%, προσεύχεσθε ἵνα μὴ ἔλθητε εἰς πειρασμόν----[ῃρ parataxis was probably once as real as it is in a phrase like Lk 12% ὁρᾶτε καὶ φυλάσσεσθε. In Rev 1919 229 we find μή standing alone after dpa: cf our colloquial “ Don’t!” One important difference between pro- hibition and warning is that in the latter we may have either present or aorist subjunctive: Heb 12% is an ex. of the present. But we must return to these sentences later. An innovation in Hellenistic is ἵνα c. subj. in commands, which takes the place of the classical ὅπως c. fut. indic. Whether it was independently developed, or merely came in as an obvious equivalent, we need not stop to enquire. In any case it fell into line with other tendencies which weakened the telic force of ἵνα ; and from a very restricted activity in the vernacular of the NT period it advanced to a prominent position in MGr syntax (see above, p. 176). In the papyri we have a moderate number of exx., the earliest of which: is FP 112 (i/aD.) ἐπέχον (=-wv) Ζωίλωι καὶ eva αὐτὸν μὴ δυσωπήσης, “attend to Z. and don’t look askance at him.” An earlier ex. appears in a letter of Cicero (Att. vi. 5”) ταῦτα
1 Cauer 264 (iv/iii B.c.). It must however be noted that Brugmann (Gram.® 500) calls the connexion of this with the prehistoric jussive 3rd sing. ‘‘sehr zweifelhaft”” : he does not give his reasons.
3 Philoct. 300 : see Jebb.
THE VERB: THE MOODS. 179
οὖν, πρῶτον μέν, wa πάντα σῴζηται" δεύτερον δέ, ἵνα μηδὲ τῶν τόκων ὀλυγωρήσῃς. Winer (WM 396) would find it “in the Greek poets,” citing however only Soph. OC 155. W. F. Moulton, in setting this aside as solitary and dubious, observes that the scholiast took the passage this way—in his day of course the usage was common.* An ex. for the 1st person may be added: BU 48 (ii/iii 4.0.) ἐὰν ἀναβῇς τῇ ἑορτῇ, ἵνα ὁμόσε γενώμεθα. In the NT the best ex. is Eph 5% ἡ δὲ γυνὴ ἵνα φοβῆται τὸν ἄνδρα, which is correlated with ἀγαπάτω in the first clause. So 2 Co 87, Mk 5%: Gal 2:9 may be regarded as the same construction put indirectly. Mk 10° and parallels have really the same: θέλω iva more nearly coalesce in Mk 6% 10%, Jn 17%. The combination θέλω ἵνα, which of course is not confined to quasi-imperative use, gave birth ultimately to the MGr auxiliary θά (θενά, etc.), (3) Optative ; forming the future tense. The Optative can
’ express commands through either of its main constructions, but its evanescence in the Κοινή naturally limits NT illustrations. The Optative proper (neg. μή), however, does occur in Mk 11%: note that Mt (21%) sub- stitutes the familiar construction ov μή 6. subj. The Poten- tial with ἄν (neg. ov), as λόγοις ἄν, “pray speak,” is not wae found in NT at all! The imperatival
(4) Infinitive ; Infinitive has been needlessly sbjected to. It is unquestionable in Phil 8:6, Rom 12%, and highly pro- bable in Tit 25:10; we must not add Lk 9%, which is merely a case of mixed direct and indirect speech. The epistolary χαίρειν, Ac 15% 23% Jas 1], is the same in origin. We no longer need Winer’s reminder (p. 397) that the verbs in 1 Th 3", 2 Th 2)” 35 are optatives; but it is well to note that our assurance rests on something better than the accentuation, which any one of us may emend, if he sees fit, without any MS that counts saying him nay, The infin. for imper. was familiar in Greek, especially in laws and in maxims. It survives in the Κοινή, as the papyri show: on AP 86 (i/a.D.), ἐξεῖναι and μισθῶσαι, cf Radermacher in RAM \vii. 147, who notes it as a popular use.* Hatzidakis
sy ς΄. ΄ἰἰἰᾧὦὃΚ.Ἐὃἥἅ.ὄ.-.--΄5ἅ“ὃ.΄ὦὃ-ΚἐἝ“Ξ!-......--..΄΄΄.΄.---Ὡ-ΦὋὉὩῸᾶρΦ|}:λ..νϑν0Ὸττὧὐὔὐὐῷὖ.-ὃἷἰῆὙῆρῆῸΔ|........
1 An ex. perhaps occurs in Par P 42 (ii/B.c.), χαρίξζου (}5ΞΞ -οιο) δ᾽ ἂν καὶ τοῦ σώματος ἐπιμελόμενος ty’ ὑγιαίνῃς. {75° See p. 248.
180 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
shows (p. 192) that in the Pontic dialect, the only form of MGr in which the infinitive form survives, the infin. is still used as an imperative for all numbers and persons, We have therefore every reason to expect it in the NT, and its rarity there is the only matter for surprise. Last among wos these substitutes for the imperative comes the
(5) Participle. Participle, the admission of which, despite Winer’s objections (p. 441), is established beyond question by the papyri. The proof of this will be given when we deal with the Participle in its place. Here it is sufficient to point out that a passage like 1 Pet 3%", where adjectives and participles alike obviously demand the unexpressed ἐστέ, gives us the rationale of the usage clearly enough. It is a curious fact that while ἔσθιε occurs 5 times in NT, ἔστω (ἤτω) 14, and ἔστωσαν twice, ἐστέ, which we should have expected to be common, does not appear at all. Γίνεσθε occurs and ἔσεσθε, but it seems more idiomatic to drop the copula: compare the normal absence of the verb with predicates like μακάριος, κατάρατος, εὐλογητός, ovat, which sometimes raises doubts whether an indicative or an imperative (optative) is understood. We are accordingly absolved from inventing an anacoluthon, or some other grammatical device when we come to such a passage as Rom 1299. where adjectives and parti- ciples, positive and negative, in imperative sense are inter- rupted by imperatives in vv.'+ 1619 and infinitives in ν. 7, The participles are obviously durative in their action: this is well seen in v.!°, where ἐκδικοῦντες, meaning either “do not avenge yourselves (whenever wronged) ”—iterative sense— or “do not (as your tendency is)” (supr. p. 125), is strongly contrasted with the decisive aorist δότε, “once and for all inake room for the Wrath? (which alone can do justice on wrong). The infinitives are appropriate in the concise maxim of v.. Assuming the cogency of the vernacular
1 See Deissmann BS 344. Ido not however think there is any real ellipsis of a verb of command: see below, p. 203. Historically there is probably no ellipsis even in the epistolary χαίρειν. It should be stated that Viteau i. 146 claims this also as a Hebraism! See Thumb, Hedlen. 180 f. ; also Meisterhans*® 244-6, for its use in decrees.
2 So the RV in the First Revision, and the American Revisers, beyond all question rightly. It is one more example of the baneful effects of the two- thirds rule upon the RV.
THE VERB: THE MOODS. 181
evidence given on p. 223 below, we may select the following as probable exx. of imperatival participle from the list of passages in which the absence of such evidence compelled Winer Jc. to adopt other interpretations!:—1 Pet 317 218 48f.: in this last passage ἔχοντες might of course be con- structed with νήψατε, and at first sight it seems possible in this way to avoid an asyndeton. But πρὸ πάντων only intro- duces a series of asyndetic precepts, in which φιλόξενοι and διακονοῦντες must have the same construction. To supply the imperative idea (as in 4) seems simplest, though of course vv.2-! are all still dependent on the imperatives of _v.", Since Peter is evidently given to this construction, we may take 212 in the same way, though it would pass as an easy constr. ad sensum with v.: one would be inclined to add 114. but Hort’s alternative must be noted.2 These are all the passages we can accept from Winer’s list of exx. proposed; a glance at the unrecorded remainder will vividly show what astounding fatuities, current in his day, the great grammarian had to waste his space in refuting. But we may extend the list somewhat. Paul was not so fond of this construction as his brother apostle: note how in 1 Pet 3}, echoing Eph 5”, the ὑποτασσόμεναι is slipped into the place where Paul (according to B and Jerome) left an ellipsis, having used the verb just before in a regular sequence. But the exx. we have already had are conclusive for Paul’s usage. Add Col 316 (note the imperative to be supplied after πάντα in v."), 2 Co 94-13 and Eph 4% (cf 1 Pet 23%). In 2 Co 83 évde- κνύμενοι is read by B (and the 6-text uncials,—presumably the reason why WH relegate it to the margin): it is how- ever obvious that the ἐνδείξασθε of NC and the later uncials is not likely to be original as against the participle, which would challenge correction. The imper. in Versions counts for little, if we are right in our account of the idiom; but the participle wstaiknyandans in Wulfila is a noteworthy piece
1 We follow Winer’s order, tacitly agreeing with his explanation when we pass over a passage cited. The exx. in which the ptc. would be indicatival will be dealt with below. (An important ex. is added on p. 240.)
31 must withdraw 57, cited in Hapos. νι. x. 450: the participle there goes closely with rarewwOnre. Probably 3’ was meant—“‘ sed μνημονικὸν ἁμάρτημα," as Cicero says.
182 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
of evidence on the other side. 2 Co 911 is more simply ex- plained this way than by the assumption of a long parenthesis. Rom 13! means “and this (do) with knowledge,” the parti- ciple being rather the complement of an understood imperative than imperative itself. Heb 13° gives us an ex. outside Peter and Paul. With great hesitation, I incline to add Lk 24:57, punctuating with WHmg: “Begin ye from Jeru- salem as witnesses of these things.” The emphatic ὑμεῖς, repeated in v.*, thus marks the contrast between the Twelve, for whom Jerusalem would always be the centre, and one to be raised up soon who would make the world his parish: the hint is a preparation for Luke’s Book II. There are difficulties, but they seem less than the astonishing breach of concord which the other punctuation forces on so correct a writer. (See p. 240.) On this usage in general W. F. Moulton (WM 732 n.) sided with Winer, especially against T. 8. Green’s suggestion that it was an Aramaism; but he ends with saying “In Heb 13°, Rom 12°*, it must not be forgotten that by the side of the participles stand adjectives, with which the imperative of εἶναι is confessedly to be supplied.” This is, as we have seen, the most probable reason of a use which new evidence allows us to accept without the mis- givings that held back both Winer and his editor. It 18 not however really inconsistent with Lightfoot’s suggestive note on Col 31%, in which he says, “ The absolute participle, being (so far as regards mood) neutral in itself, takes its colour from the general complexion of the sentence. Thus it is sometimes indicative (eg. 2 Co 75, and frequently), some- times imperative (as in the passages quoted [Rom 12% 161. Eph 45", Heb 135, 1 Pet 212 31.7.9 15. 167), sometimes opta- tive (as [Col] 22, 2 Co 911, οἱ Eph 317.) The fact is, when we speak of a part of εἶναι being “understood,” we are really using inexact language, as even English will show. I take the index to my hymn-book and note the first line of three of Charles Wesley’s hymns :—“ Happy the souls that first. believed,” “ Happy soul that free from harms,” “ Happy soul, thy days are ended.” In the first, on this grammatical principle, we should supply were, in the second ὦ (¢he), while we call the third a vocative, that is, an interjection. But the very “!”-mark which concludes the stanza in each case

THE VERB: THE MOODS. 183
shows that all three are on the same footing: “the general complexion of the sentence,” as Lightfoot says, determines in what sense we are to take a grammatical form which is indeterminate in itself. ΝΝ A few more words are called for. upon Bome Elliptical the subject of defective clauses made into Imperative . . Clauses. commands, prayers, imprecations, etc., by the exclamatory form in which they are cast, or by the nature of their context. In Rom 13" and Col 317 we have already met with imperatives needing to be supplied from the context: Mt 279. %, Col 46, Gal 15 (see Lightfoot) and Jn 20” are interjectional clauses, and there is nothing conclusive to show whether imperative or optative, or in some like clauses (6... Lk 1%) indicative, of εἶναι would be inserted if the sentence were expressed in full logical form. Other exx. may be seen in WM 732 ff. But there is one case of heaped-up ellipses on which we must tarry a little, that of Rom 1268, There is much to attract, despite all the weight of contrary authority, in the punctuation which places only a comma at end of v.°, or—-what comes to nearly the same thing—the treatment of ἔχοντες as virtually equi- valent to ἔχομεν: “But we have grace-gifts which differ according to the grace that was given us, whether that of prophecy (differing) according to the measure of our faith, or that of service (differing) in the sphere of the service, or he that teaches (exercising—éywrv—his gift) in his teaching, or he that exhorts in his exhorting, he who gives (exercising this charism) in singleness of purpose, he who holds office in a deep sense of responsibility, he who shows compassion in cheerfulness.” In this way we have διάφορον supplied with προφητείαν and διακονίαν, and then the ἔχοντες χαρίσματα is taken up in each successive clause, in nearly the same sense throughout: the durative sense of éyw, hold and so exercise, must be once more remembered. But as by advanc- ing this view we shall certainly fall under the condemnation for “hardihood,” pronounced by such paramount authorities as SH, we had better state the alternative, which is the justi- fication for dealing with this well-known crux here. The imperatival idea, which on the usual view is understood in the several clauses, must be derived from the fact that the
184 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
prepositional phrases are successively thrown out as inter- jections. If we put into words the sense thus created, perhaps ἔστω will express as much as we have the right to express: we may have to change it to ὦμεν with ἐν τῇ διακονίᾳ (“let us be wrapped up in,” like ἐν τούτοις ἴσθι 1 Ti 4%). In this way we arrive at the meaning given in paraphrase by the RV. |
We take next the most live of the Moods, the only one which has actually increased its activities during the thirty-two centuries of the history of the Greek language! According to the classification adopted by Brugmann,? there are three main divisions of the subjunctive, the volitive, the deliberative, and the futuristic. Brugmann separates the last two, against W. G. Hale, because the former has μὴ as its negative, while the latter originally had ov. But the question may well be asked whether the first two are radically separable. Prof. Sonnenschein well points out (CR xvi. 166) that the “ deli- berative ” is only “a question as to what is or was to be done.” A command may easily be put in to the interrogative tone: witness οὖσθ᾽ οὖν ὃ Spacov; quin redeamus? (=why should we not ? answering to redeamus=let us), and our own “ Have some?” The objection to the term “ deliberative,” and to the separation of the first two classes, appears to be well grounded. It should further be observed that the future indicative has carried off not only the futuristic but also the volitive and deli- _ berative subjunctives ; cf such a sentence as εἴπωμεν ἢ συγῶμεν: ἢ τί δράσομεν ;® With the caveat already suggested, we may outline the triple division. The Volitive has been treated largely under the substitutes for the imperative. We must add the use with μή in warning, which lies near that in prohibition; cf Mt 25% Intro- ductory words like φοβοῦμαι, σκόπει, etc., did not historically
The Subjunctive.
(1) Volitive ;
1 So if we start from the mention of the Achaians on an Egyptian monu- ment of 1275 3.c.—’ Akaiwasa =’AxatFés, the prehistoric form of ’Axatol. See Hess and Streitberg in Indog. Forsch. vi. 123 ff.
2 Gram.? 490 ff.
8 Eurip. Jon 771. On the subjunctive element in the Greek future see above, p. 149. Lat. ero, faxo, Greek πίομαι, φάγομαι (Hellenistic mixture of | ἔδομαι and ἔφαγον), xéw, are clear subjunctive forms, to name only a few.
THE VERB: THE MOODS. 185
determine the construction: thus Heb 4! was really “ Let us fear! haply one of you may ...!”° Out of the Volitive arose the great class of dependent clauses of Purpose, also paratactic in origin. The closeness of relation between future and subjunctive is seen in the fact that final clauses with ὅπως c. fut. were negatived with μή: the future did not by any means restrict itself to the futuristic use of the mood which it pillaged. On the so-called Deliberative we have ; . _ already said nearly enough for our purpose.
(ὦ Deliherative ; It is seen in questions, as Mk 12% δῶμεν ἢ μὴ δῶμεν; Mt 2388 πῶς duynte; Rom 1014 πῶς ἐπικαλέσωνται; The question may be dependent, as Lk 954 θέλεις εἴπωμεν ; (MGr θὰ εἰποῦμε;: is simple future, shall we say?) We see it both with and without ἵνα in Lk 18*. In the form of the future we meet it in sentences like Lk 229 εἰ πατάξομεν ἐν μαχαίρῃ; The present subjunctive is probably to be recognised in Mt 118 ἕτερον προσδοκῶμεν; Finally, the (3) Futuristic, Futuristic is seen still separate from the future tense in the Homeric καὶ ποτὲ tis
Feimrnot, and in isolated relics in Attic Greek, like τέ πάθω; Its primitive use reappears in the Κοινή, where in the later papyri the subjunctive may be seen for the simple future. Blass (p. 208) quotes it occurring as early as the LXX, Is 33% ἀφεθῇ yap αὐτοῖς ἡ ἁμαρτία. It is from the futuristic subjunctive that the dependent clauses with ἐάν and ὅταν sprang: the negative μή, originally excluded from this division of the subjunctive, has trespassed here from the earliest times. There is one passage where the old use of the subjunctive in comparisons seems to outcrop, Mk 435 as ἄνθρωπος βάλῃ τὸν σπόρον... καὶ καθεύδῃ (ete., all pres. subj.).22 It is hard to say to which of the three divisions this belongs—Brugmann remarks on the impossibility of determining the classification of dependent clauses in general, —pbut perhaps the futuristic is best, like our “as a man will sow, etc. The survival of this out-of-the-way subjunctive in the artless Greek of Mk is not very easy to explain;
1 See some exx. below, p. 240. [6 See p. 248. > See p. 249.
3 It must be noted that Blass? (p. 321) calls this impossible, and inserts ἐάν. But xBDLA and the best cursives agree on this reading: why should they agree on the Zectio ardua’t Ὥς ἐάν (AC) has all the signs of an obvious correction.
186 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
it is indeed hardly likely, in the absence of evidence from the intermediate period, that there is any real continuity of usage. But the root-ideas of the subjunctive changed remarkably little in the millennium or so separating Homer from the Gospels; and the mood which was more and more winning back its old domain from the future tense may well have come to be used again as a “gnomic future” without any knowledge of the antiquity of such a usage. Other examples of this encroachment will occur as we go on.
The kind of action found in the present, aorist, and perfect subjunctive hardly needs further comment, the less as we shall have to return to them when we deal with the dependent clauses. One result of the aorist action has important exegetical consequences, which have been very insufficiently observed. It affects rela- tive, temporal or conditional clauses introduced by pronoun or conjunction with ἄν (often ἐάν in NT, see pp. 42). The verbs are all futuristic, and the ἄν ties them up to particular occur- rences. The present accordingly is conative or continuous or iterative: Mt 62 ὅταν woins ἐλεημοσύνην “whenever thou art for doing alms,” 616 ὅταν νηστεύητε “ whenever ye are fasting,” Jn 2° ὅτι ἂν λέγῃ “whatever he says (from time to time).” The aorist, being future by virtue of its mood, punctiliar by its tense, and consequently describing complete action, gets a future-perfect sense in this class of sentence; and it will be found most important to note this before we admit the less rigid translation. Thus Mt 5% ὃς ἂν φονεύσῃ “the man who has committed murder,” 5* ἐὰν ἀσπάσησθε “if you have only saluted,” Mk 918 ὅπου ἐὰν αὐτὸν καταλάβῃ “ wherever it has seized him:” the cast of the sentence allows us to abbreviate the future-perfect in these cases. Mt 5*! at first sight raises some difficulty, but ἀπολύσῃ denotes not so much the carrying into effect as the determination. We may quote a passage from the Meidias of Demosthenes (p. 525) which exhibits the difference of present and aorist in this connexion very neatly : χρὴ δὲ ὅταν μὲν τιθῆσθε τοὺς νόμους ὁποῖοί τινές εἰσιν σκοπεῖν, ἐπειδὰν δὲ θῆσθε, φυλάττειν καὶ χρῆσθαι---τιθῆσθε applies to bills, θῆσθε to acts.
The part which the Subjunctive plays in the scheme of the Conditional Sentences demands a few lines here, though
Tenses.
wT
. the Negatives :—
THE VERB: THE MOODS. 187
any systematic treatment of this large subject must be left for our second volume. The difference between εἰ and
Conditional ἐάν has been considerably lessened in Hellen-
Sentences, istic as compared with earlier Greek. We
Simple, have seen that ἐάν can even take the indi-
General and ative; while (as rarely in classical Greek)
Future. i can be found with the subjunctive. The latter occurs only in 1 Co 145, where the peculiar phrase accounts for it: cf the inscription cited by Deissmann (BS 118), ἐκτὸς εἰ μὴ dav! . . . θελήση. We should hardly care to build much on Rev 11°, In Lk 918 and Phil 3™ we probably have deliberative subjunctive, “unless we are to go and buy,” “if after all I am to attain ... to apprehend.” The subjunctive with εὐ is rare in early papyri: cf OP 496 (ii/a.p.) εἰ δὲ ἦν (= 7) ὁ γαμῶν πρότερος τετελευτηκώς, ἐχέτω κτὰ. The differentiation of construction remains at present. stereotyped: εἰ goes with indicative, is used exclusively when past tenses come in (e.g. Mk 3”), and uses ov as its negative ; while ἐάν, retaining μή exclusively, takes the subjunctive almost invariably, unless the practically synonymous future indicative is used. ‘Eav and εἰ are both used, however, to express future conditions. This is not only the case with εἰ c. fut.—in which the NT does not preserve the “ minatory or monitory” connotation which Gildersleeve discovered for classical Greek—but even with εἰ c. pres. in such documents as BU 326, quoted above, p. 59. The immense majority of conditional sentences in the NT belong to these heads. We deal with the unfulfilled condition below, pp. 200 f., and with the relics of εἰ c. opt. p. 196.
Leaving the Dependent Clauses for sub- sequent treatment, let us turn now to some aspects of the negative μή, mainly though not exclusively concerning the Subjunctive. Into the vexed question of the origin of the οὐ μή con- struction we must not enter with any detail. The classical discussion of it in Goodwin MT 389 ff. leaves some very serious difficulties, though it has advanced our knowledge. Goodwin’s insistence that denial and prohibition must be
Some Uses of
Οὐ μή.
1 Cf what is said above (p. 169) about εἰ μήτι ἄν.
188 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
dealt with together touches a weak spot in Prof. Sonnen- schein’s otherwise very attractive account of the prohibitory use, In ἃ paper already quoted (CRA xvi 165ff.). Sonnen- schein would make ov μὴ ποιήσῃς the interrogative of the prohibition μὴ ποιήσῃς, “won't you abstain from doing ?” Similarly in Latin guin noli facere? is “why not refuse to do?” The theory is greatly weakened by its having no obvious application to denial. Gildersleeve (AJP iii. 202 ff.) suggests that the ov may be separate: ov μὴ σκώψῃης =no/ don’t jeer, od μὴ yévntac=no!. let it never be!* Brugmann (Gram 502) practically follows Goodwin, whom he does not name. We start from μή in cautious assertion, to which we must return presently : μὴ γένηται = tt may perchance happen, μὴ σκώψῃς = you will perhaps jeer, μὴ ἐρεῖς τοῦτο = you will perhaps say this. Then the ov negatives the whole, so that ov μή becomes, as Brugmann says, “certainly not.” Non nostrum est tantas componere lites: these questions go back upon origins, and we are dealing with the language in a late development, in which it is antecedently possible enough that the rationale of the usage may have been totally obscured. The use of οὐ μή in the Greek Bible calls for special com- ment, and we may take for our text some remarks of Gilder- sleeve’s from the brief article just cited. “This emphatic form of negative (οὐ μή) is far more common in the LXX and the NT than it is in the classic Greek. This tendency to exaggeration in the use of an adopted language is natural.” And again, “The combination has evidently worked its way up from familiar language. So it occurs in the mouth of the Scythian archer, Ar. Thesmoph. 1108 οὐκὶ μὴ λαλῆσι ov;” Our previous inquiries have prepared us for some modifications of this statement. “ Zhe NT” is not a phrase we can allow; nor will “adopted language” pass muster without qualification. In Hap 7 xiv. 429 n. the writer ventured on a preliminary note suggested by NP 51, a Christian letter about coeval with & and B, in which Mt 10* or Mk 9* is loosely cited from memory and οὐκ ἀπολλῖ (sic) substituted for οὐ μὴ ἀπολέσῃ. There are, if memory serves, scarcely more than half-a-dozen cases of ov μή in the non-literary papyri. On the other hand, we find it 13 times in OT citations in NT, and akundantly in the 4 See p. 249.
THE VERB: THE MOODS. 189
Gospels, almost exclusively in Zogia. In all of these we have certain or probable Semitic originals. Apart from these, and the special case of Rev, it occurs only four times in Paul and once in 2 Pet. It will be seen therefore that if “ translation Greek” is put aside, we have no difference between papyri and NT. Paul’s few exx. are eminently capable of bearing emphasis in the classical manner. The frequency of ov μή in Rev may partly be accounted for by recalling the extent to which Semitic material probably underlies the Book; but the unlettered character of most of the papyrus quotations, coupled with Gildersleeve’s remark on Aristophanes’ Scythian, suggests that elementary Greek culture may be partially responsible here, 85 in the rough translations on which Mt and Lk had to work for their reproduction of the words of Jesus. The question then arises whether in places outside the free Greek of Paul we are to regard ov μή as bearing any special emphasis. The analysis of W. G. Ballantine (AJP xviii. 453 ff.), seems to show that it is impossible to assert this. In the LXX, xd is translated οὐ or οὐ μὴ indifferently within a single verse, asin Is 55, The Revisers have made it emphatic in a good many passages in which the AV had an ordinary negative; but they have left over fifty places unaltered, and do not seem to have discovered any general principle to guide their decision. Prof. Ballantine seems to be justified in claiming (1) that it is not natural for a form of special emphasis to be used in the majority of places where a negative prediction occurs, and (2) that in relative clauses, and questions which amount to positive assertions, an emphatic negative is wholly out of place: he instances Mk 13? and Jn 18"—Mt 25° is decidedly more striking. In commenting on this article, Gildersleeve cites other examples of the “blunting ... of pointed idioms in the transfer from classic Greek”: he mentions the disproportionate use of “the more pungent aorist” as against the “quieter present imperative ”—the tendency of Josephus to “overdo the participle ””—the con- gpicuous appearance in narrative of the “articular infinitive, which belongs to argument.” So here, he says, “the stress ” of ov μή “has been lost by over-familiarity.” One is inclined to call in the survival among uneducated people of the older English double negatives—“ He didn’t say nothing to nobody,”
190 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
and the like—which resemble ov μή in so far as they are old forms preserved by the unlearned, mainly perhaps because they give the emphasis that is beloved, in season and out of season, by people whose style lacks restraint. But this parallel does not take us very far, and in particular does not illustrate the fact that οὐ μή was capable of being used by a cultured writer like Paul with its full classical emphasis.! :
Let us now tabulate NT statistics. In WH fezt, ov py occurs in all 96 times. Of these 71 exx. are with aor. subj. ; in 2, the verb is ambiguous, ending in -w; and 15 more, ending in -εἰς (-ev) or -ἧς (-7), might be regarded as equally indetermin- ate, as far as the evidence of the MSS readings is concerned. There remain 8 futures. Four of these—Mt 16” ἔσται, with Lk 2188 and Rev 96 1814 (see below)—-are unambiguous: the rest only involve the change of o to ὦ, or at worst that of ov to w, to make them aor. subj. The passages are :-—Mt 26° (-copat RBCD)= Mk 148: (-cowas ABCD, against δὲ and the mob). (The attestation in Mt is a strong confirmation of the future for the Petrine tradition in its earliest Greek form.) Lk 21% (-covtas XBDL) answers to the Marcan ov παρελεύ- σονται (13°! BD: the insertion of μή by sACL etc. means a mere assimilation to Lk), while Mt has ov μὴ παρέλθωσιν (24%): it is at least possible that our Lucan text is only a fusion of Mk and Mt. In Jn 105 ABD al. support ἀκολουθήσονσιν. In Heb 10” (from LXX) we have the μνησθήσομαι of SACD 17 and the Oxyrhynchus papyrus emended to μνησθῶ (following the LXX) in correctors of & and D and all the later MSS. There remains εὑρήσουσιν in Rev 9° (AP εὕρωσιν, against xB,) 181% We need not hesitate to accept the future as a possible, though moribund, construction: the later MSS in trying to get rid of it bear witness to the levelling tendency. There is no apparent difference in meaning. We may pass on to note
1 Winer (p. 634) refers to ‘‘ the prevailing opinion of philologers” in his own time (and later), that οὐ μὴ ποιήσῃς originates in an ellipsis—‘‘ no fear that he will do it.” It is advisable therefore to note that this view has been abandoned by modern philology. To give full reasons would detain us too long. But it may be observed that the dropping out of the vital word for fearing needs explanation, which has not been forthcoming ; while the theory, suiting denials well enough, gives no natural account of prohibitions.
΄
THE VERB: THE MOODS. 191
the distribution of οὐ μή in NT. It occurs 13 times in LXX citations. Apart from these, there are no exx. in Ac, Heb, or the “General Epp”, except 2 Pet 1% Rev has it 16 times. Paul’s use is limited to 1 Th 4° (υ. infr.) 5°, 1 Co 838, Gal 516, Only 21 exx. in all come from these sources, leaving 64 for the Gospels. Of the latter 57 are from actual words of Christ (Mt 17, Mk 8 [Mk] 1, Lk 17, Jn 14): of the remaining 7, Mt 16% and 26% (=Mk 14%), Jn 138 205 have most obvious emphasis, and so may Lk 1% (from the special nativity-source!) and Jn 11°% That the locution was very much at home in translations, and unfamiliar in original Greek, is by this time abundantly clear. But we may attempt a further analysis, by way of contribution to the minutie of the Synoptic problem. If we go through the exx. of ov μή in Mk, we find that Mt has faithfully taken over every one, 8 in all, Lk has 5 of these logia, once (Mk 13? = Lk 21°) dropping the μή. Mt introduces od μή into Mk 713, and Lk into Mk 4% and 10”, both Mt and Lk into Mk 13® (see above).? Turning to “Q”, so far as we can deduce it from logia common to Mt and Lk, we find only two places (Mt 5%=Lk 12°, Mt 2889 = Lk 13%) in which the evangelists agree in using ov μή. Mt uses it in 538 (Lk 21% has a certain resemblance, but 16” is the parallel), and Lk in 6° dis (contrast Mt 7?) Finally, in the logia peculiar to Mt or Lk, the presence of which in “Q” is therefore a matter of speculation, we find ov μή 4 times in Mt and 7 in Lk. When the testimony of Jn is added, we see that this negative is impartially distributed over all our sources for the words of Christ, without special prominence in any one evangelist or any one of the documents which they seem to have used. Going outside the Gospels, we find οὐ μή in the fragment of Aristion (2) 8 ((Mk] 1 618). in 1 Th 4 (regarded by Ropes, DB v. 345, as an Agraphon); and in the Oxyrhynchus “Sayings ”—no. 2 of the first series, and
1 ΤῸ comes from the LXX of 1 Sam 111, if A is right there, with πίεται changed to the aor. subj. But A of course may show a reading conformed to the NT.
2 As to Mk 433, note that in the doublet from ‘‘Q” neither Mt (10%) nor Lk (12?) has οὐ μή : the new Oxyrhynchus ‘‘ Saying,” no. 4, has also simple οὐ.
8 The criticisms of B. W. Bacon, in Hapos. for Dec. 1905, may dispose us to double the query.
192 <A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
the preface of the second. The coincidence of all these separate witnesses certainly is suggestive. Moreover in Rev, the only NT Book outside the Gospels which has οὐ μή with any fre- quency, 4 exx. are from the Epp. to the Churches, where Christ is speaker; and all of the rest, except 1814 (which is very emphatic), are, strongly reminiscent of the OT, though not according to the LXX except in 18% (= Ezek 264%), It follows that od μή is quite as rare in the NT as it is in the papyri, when we have put aside (a) passages coming from the OT, and (0) sayings of Christ, these two classes accounting for nearly 90 per cent. of the whole. Since these are just the two elements which made up “Scripture” in the first age of Christianity, one is tempted to put it down to the same cause in both—a feeling that inspired language was fitly rendered by words of a decisive tone not needed generally elsewhere.
In connexion with this use of negatives, we may well pursue here the later develop- ments of that construction of μή from which the use of ov μή originally sprang, according to the theory that for the present holds the field. It is obvious, whatever be its antecedent history, that μή is often equivalent to our “perhaps.” A well-known sentence from Plato’s Apology will illustrate it as well as anything: Socrates says (p. 39a) GANA μὴ οὐ τοῦτ᾽ ἦ χαλεπόν, θάνατον ἐκφυγεῖν, “ perhaps it is not this which is hard, to escape death.” This is exactly like Mt 25° as it stands in sALZ: the οὐ μή which replaces ov in BCD does not affect the principle. The subjunctive has its futuristic sense, it would seem, and starts most naturally in Greek from the use of μή in questions: how this developed from the original use of μή in prohibition (whence comes the final sentence), and how far we are to call in the sentences of fearing, which are certainly not widely separable, it would not be relevant for us to discuss in this treatise. Μὴ τοῦτ᾽ ἦ χαλεπόν, if originally a question, meant “ will this possibly be difficult?” So in the indicative, as Plato Protag. 3124 ἀλλ᾽ dpa μὴ οὐχ ὑπολαμβάνεις, “ but perhaps then you do not suppose” (Riddell 140). We have both these forms abundantly before us in the NT :—thus Lk 1186 σκόπει μὴ τὸ φῶς... σκότος ἐστίν, “ Look! perhaps
Μή in Cautious Assertions.

THE VERB: THE MOODS. 193
the light . . . is darkness”; Col 28 βλέπετε μή τις ἔσται ὁ συλαγωγῶν, “Take heed! perhaps there will be someone who ... (ef Heb 3); Gal 4" φοβοῦμαι ὑμᾶς μή πως εἰκῆ κεκοπίακα, “I am afraid about you: perhaps I have toiled in vain.” So in the papyri, as Par P 49 (ii/B.c.) ἀγωνιῶ μήποτε ἀρρωστεῖ τὸ παιδάριον, NP 17 (iii/a.p.) ὑφωροῦμε . . . μὴ dpa ἐνθρώσκων ἔλαθεν ὕδατι. In all these cases the prohibi- tive force of μή is more or less latent, producing a strong deprecatory tone, just as in a direct question μή either demands the answer No (as Mt 79 etc.), or puts a suggestion in the most tentative and hesitating way (Jn 4”). The fineness of the distinction between this category and the purpose clause may be illustrated by 2 Co 2’, where the paratactic original might equally well be “ Perhaps he will be overwhelmed” or “Let him not be overwhelmed.” In Gal 2? the purpose clause (if such it be), goes back to the former type—‘“Can it be that I am running, or ran, in vain?”! Cf 1 Th 3°. The warning of Ac 5° might similarly start from either “ Perhaps you will be found,” or “ Do not be found”: the former suits the ποτέ better. It will be seen that the uses in question have mostly become hypotactic, but that no real change in the tone of the sentence is introduced by the governing word. The case is the same as with prohibitions introduced by ὅρα, βλέπετε, προσέχετε, etc.: see above, p. 124. One very difficult case under this head should be mentioned here, that of 2 Tim 2% We have already (p. 55) expressed the conviction that dw7 is really δώῃ, subjunctive. Not only would the optative clash with ἀνανήψωσιν, but it cannot be justified in itself by any clear syntactic rule. The difficulty felt by WH (App 168), that “its use for two different moods in the same Epistle would be strange,” really comes to very little; and the survival of the epic δώῃ is better supported than they suggest. There is an apparent case of γνώῃ subj. in Clement Paed. iii. 1, ἑαυτὸν yap τις ἐὰν γνώῃ, θεὸν εἴσεται. A respectable number of quotations for δώῃ is given from early Christian litera-
1 Tpéxw is best perhaps subjunctive, since the sentence as it stands is felt as final. This interpretation as a whole has to reckon with the alternative render- ing, ‘‘Am I running (said 1), or have I run, in vain?’’ There is much to be said for this: see Findlay in Exp B p. 104.
13
194 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
ture in Reinhold 90f. Phrynichus (Rutherford NP 429. 456) may fairly be called as evidence not only for the Hellenistic δῴη and διδῴη (which he and his editor regard as “utterly ridiculous”) but for the feeling that there is a subjunctive δώῃ, though he only quotes Homer. But we must not press this, only citing from Rutherford the statement that some MSS read “δῴη for δῷ in Plato Gorg. 4814, where the optative would be most obviously out of place. If we read the opt. in 2 Tim lc., we can only assume that the writer misused an obsolete idiom, correctly used in Lk 3” in past sequence. Against this stands the absence of evidence that Paul (or the auctor ad Timotheum, if the critics demur) concerned himself with literary archaisms, like his friends the authors of Lk, Ac, and Heb. Taking δώῃ and ἀνανήψωσιν together, we make the μήποτε introduce a hesitating question, “to try whether haply God may give”: cf the well-known idiom with εἰ, “to see if,” as in Ac 2712, Rom 119, Lk 14%, Phil 3". See in favour of the subj. δώῃ the careful note in WS 120. Blass (p. 50) agrees. ; We take next the Optative, which makes The nae " go poor a figure in the NT that we are tempted ptative . - o> Proper ; to hurry on. In MGr its only relic? is the phrase μὴ γένοιτο, which appears in Lk 2016 and 14 times in Rom (10), 1 Co (1) and Gal (3). This is of course the Optative proper, distinguished by the absence of ἄν and the presence (if negative) of μή, Burton (MT 79) cites 35 proper optatives from the NT, which come down to
1 Unfortunately we cannot call the LXX in aid: there are a good many exx. of δῴη, but they all seem optative. Τίς δῴη. . . ; in Num 11”, Judg 9”, 2 Sam 18%, Job 31%, Ca 8!, Jer 9%, might well seem deliberative subj., but Ps 120(119)® τί δοθείη σοι καὶ τί προστεθείη σοι ; is unfortunately quite free from ambiguity. We may regard these as rea] wishes thrown into the interrogative form. The LXX use of the optative looks a promising subject for Mr Thackeray’s much-necded Grammar. We will only observe here that in Num 1.6. the Hebrew has the simple imperf.—also that A has a tendency to change opt. into subj. (as Ruth 19 δῷ... εὕρητε), which accords with the faint distinction between them. In Dt 28% we have opt. and fut. indic. alternating, with no variation in the Hebrew. A more surprising fusion still—worse than 2 Tim 2.6. with d¢7—is seen in 2 Mac 9% ἐάν τι παράδοξον ἀποβαίη καὶ wpocamrenOy.
3 But see p. 240.
THE VERB: THE MOODS. 195
20 when we drop μὴ yévorro. Of these Paul claims 14 (Rom 15°, Philem *, 2 Tim 11638 and the rest in 1 and 2 Th), while Mk, Lk, Ac, Heb, 1 Pet and 2 Pet have one apiece. ‘Ovaiynv in Philem™ is the only proper optative in the NT which is not 3rd person.! It will be noticed that though the use is rare it is well distributed: even Mk has it, and Lk 188 and Ac 8” come from the Palestinian stratum of Luke’s writing. We may bring in here a comparison from our own language, which will help us for the Hellenistic optative as a whole. The optative de still keeps a real though diminishing place in our educated colloquial: “be it so” or “so be it,” is preserved as ἃ formula, like μὴ γένοιτο, but “ Be it my only wisdom here ” is felt as a poetical archaism. So in the application of the optative to hypothesis, we should not generally copy “Be it never so humble,” or “If she be not fair to me”: on the other hand, “If I were you” is the only correct form. “God bless you!” “Come what may, “I wish I were at home,” are further examples of optatives still surviving. But a somewhat archaic style is recognisable in
‘Were the whole realm of nature mine, That were a present far too small.”
We shall see later that a Hellenist would equally avoid in colloquial speech a construction like
εἰ καὶ τὰ πάντ᾽ ἔμ᾽ εἴη,
τὰ πάντα μοι γένοιτ᾽ ἂν
ἔλασσον ἢ ὥστε δοῦναι, The Hellenist used the optative in wishes and prayers very much as we use our subjunctive. It is at home in formule, as in oaths passim: εὐορκοῦντι μέμ μοι εὖ εἴη, ἐφιορκοῦντι δὲ τὰ ἐναντία (OP 240—i/a.p.), ἢ ἔνοχοι εἴημεν τῶι ὅρκωι (ΟΡ 715 —ii/A.D.),... παραδώσω... ἢ ἐνσχεθείην τῷ ὅρκῳ (ΒΜ 301—ii/a.p.), etc. But it is aleo in free use, as OP 526 (ii/a.D.) χαίροις, Καλόκαιρε, LPb (ii/B.c.) ὃς διδοίη σοι, LPw (ii/iii Α.}.), μηδείς με καταβιάσαιτο and εἰσέλθοις καὶ ποιήσαις,
1 Some support for the persistence of this optative in the Κοινή may be found in its appearance in a curse of iii/B.c., coming from the Tauric Chersonese, and showing two Ionic forms (Audollent 144, no. 92).
2 Cf Sweet, New English Grammar : Syntax 107 ff.
1905 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
BU 741 (ii/a.D.) ὃ μὴ γείνοιτο, BM 21 (ii/B.c.) σοὶ δὲ γένοιτο εὐημερεῖν, BCH 1902, p. 217, κεχολωμένον ἔχοιτο Miva καταχθόνιον, Ἠ] P 6 (iii/iv aD.) ἐρρωμένον σε ἡ Oia πρόνοια φυλάξαι. -In hypotaxis the optative of wish appears in clauses with εἰ, as is shown by the negative’s being μή, as well as by the fact that we can add εἰ, si, if, to a wish, or express a hypothesis without a conjunction, by a clause of jussive or optative character. Ez with the optative in the NT occurs in 11 passages, of which 4 must be put aside as indirect questions and accordingly falling under the next head. The three exx. in Ac are all in or. obl.: 2016 (“I want if I can to... ἢ, and 27 (“We will beach her if we can”), are future conditions; and 249 puts into the past (unfulfilled) form the assertion “They ought to bring their accusation, if they have any ” (ἔχουσι). The remainder include εἰ τύχοι in 1 Co 14% 15%, the only exx. in Paul, and two in 1 Pet, εἰ καὶ πάσχοιτε 3% and εἰ θέλοι 3% The examination of these we may defer till we take up Conditional Sentences together. We only note here that HR give no more than 12 exx. from LXX of εἰ c. opt. (apart from 4 Mac and two passages I cannot trace): about 2 of these are wishes, and 4 are cases of ὥσ(περ) εἴ τις, while 2 seem to be direct or indirect questions. Neither in LXX nor in NT is there an ex. of εἰ c. opt. answered with opt. ὁ. ἄν, nor has one been quoted from the papyri! To the optative proper belongs also that after final particles, as we infer from the negative μή and from its being an alternative for the (jussive) subjunctive. It does not how- in Final clauses. °V@" call for any treatment in a NT grammar. ' We have seen already (p. 55) that ἕνα δοῖ and ἵνα γνοῖ are unmistakably subjunctives: if ἵνα δῴη be read (2b. and pp. 193 f.) in Eph 1?" it will have to be a virtual wish clause, ἵνα serving merely to link it to the previous verb; but δώῃ is preferable. This banishment of the final optative only means that the NT writers were averse to bringing in a
in Hypothesis,
1 Meanwhile we may observe that Blass’s dictum (p. 213) that the εἰ c. opt. form is used ‘‘if I wish to represent anything as generally possible, without regard to the general or actual situation at the moment,” suits the NT exx. well ; and it seems to fit the general facts better than Goodwin’s doctrine of a ‘*less vivid future” condition (Goodwin, Greek Gram. 801).

THE VERB: THE MOODS. 197
construction which was artificial, though not quite obsolete. The obsolescence of the optative had progressed since the time of the LXX, and we will only compare the writers and papyri of i/a.p. and ii/ap. Diel in his program De enuntiatis finalibus, pp. 20f, gives Josephus (i/a.D.) 32 per cent. of optatives after ἵνα, ὅπως and ὡς, Plutarch Lives (i/a.D.) 49, Arrian (ii/a.D.) 82, and Appian (ii/a.p.) 87, while Herodian (iii/a.p.) has 75. It is very clear that the final optative was the hall-mark of a pretty Attic style. The Atticisers were not particular however to restrict the optative to past sequence, as any random dip into Lucian himself will show. We may contrast the more natural Polybius (ii/B.c.), whose percentage of optatives is only 7,1 or Diodorus (i/B.c.), who falls to 5. The writer of 4 Mac (i/A.D.) outdoes all his predecessors with 71, so that we can see the cacoethes Atticissandi affecting Jew as well as Gentile. The papyri of our period only give a single optative, so far as I have observed: OP 237 (late ii/ap.) a . . . δυνηθείην A little later we have LPw (ii/iii 4.0.) ty εὔοδον ἄρτι μοι εἴην, in primary sequence; and before long, in the Byzantine age, there is a riot of optatives, after ἐάν or anything else. The deadness of the construction even in the Ptolemaic period may be well shown from TP 1 (ii/B.c.) ἠξίωσα ἵνα xpnuatiaOncotro — future optative! Perhaps these facts and citations will suffice to show why the NT does not attempt to rival the littérateurs in the use of this resuscitated elegance. . We turn to the other main division of Potential . . > ν Optative. the Optative, that of which ov and ἄν are frequent attendants. With ἄν the Potential answers to our own J should, you or he would, generally following a condition. It was used to express a future in a milder form, and to express a request in deferential style. But it is unnecessary to dwell upon this here, for the table given above (p. 166) shows that it was no longer a really living form in NT times. It was literary, but not artificial, as Luke’s use proves. It figures 30 times in LXX, or 19 times when 4 Mac is excluded, and its occurrences are
1 See Kiilker’s observations, Quast. 288 f.

198 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
tolerably well distributed and not abnormal in form. We should note however the omission of av, which was previously cited in one phrase (p. 194 π.}} We shall see that ἄν tends to be dropped with the indicative; the general weakening of the particle is probably responsible for its omission with the optative as well. Tis ἂν δῴη, Job 31% al, does not differ from tis δῴη elsewhere; and no distinction of meaning is conveyed by such an omission as appears in 4 Mac 53 συγγνωμονήσειεν, “even if there is (éori) [a God], he would forgive.” In other ways we become aware how little differ- ence ἄν makes in this age of its senescence. Thus in Par P 365 (ii/B.c.) ἐξήνεγκεν ὁπόσ᾽ ἂν épevr[@]ro,? the dropping of ἄν would affect the meaning hardly at all, the contingent force being practically ni. So when Luke says in 165 évéevevov . . . τὸ τί ἂν θέλοι “how he would like,”—cef Ac 10”, Lk 15% 1886 (Ὁ) 94,there is a minimum of difference as compared with Ac 21% ἐπυνθάνετο ris εἴη “ who he might be,” or Lk 18% SAB τί εἴη τοῦτο. Not that ἄν c. opt. in an indirect question is always as near as in this case to the unaccompanied optative which we treat next. Thus in the inser. Magn. 215 (i/a.D.) ἐπερωτᾷ... τί αὐτῷ σημαίνει ἢ ti ἂν ποιήσας ἀδεῶς διατελοίη represents the conditional sen- tence, “If I were to do what, should I be secure ?” 1.6. “ what must I do that I may ...?” So in Lk 6" τί ἂν ποιήσαιεν is the hesitating substitute for the direct τί ποιήσομεν; Ac 5% τί ἂν γένοιτο τοῦτο answers to “What will this come to?”
Cf Esth 13% πυθομένον. . . πῶς ἂν aydein . . . “how this might be brought to pass” (RV). In direct question we have Ac 1738 τί ἂν θέλοι... λέγειν; The idiomatic opt. c.
av in a softened assertion meets us in Ac 26” x°AB, εὐξαίμην ἄν “1 could pray.” Among all the exx. of ἄν c. opt. in Luke there is only one which has a protasis, Ac 8% πῶς yap ἂν δυναίμην, ἐὰν μή τις ὁδηγήσει με ;—a familiar case of future

ῬΑ Ῥ 63 (11|8Β.0.) has a dropped ἄν in a place where it is needed badly: ἀλλὰ μὲν οὐθένα ἐπείπαιμι πλὴν ὅτι ἕλκεσθαι βεβούλευτα. But I should prefer to read οὐθὲν dv >—if one may conjecture without seeing the papyrus.
2 It is unfortunate that this crucial » is missing, for ἐρευνᾶτο (an unaug- mented form) is quite possible, though less likely. The papyrus has another optative, in indirect question, εἴησαν εἰσπορευσάμενοι.
THE VERB: THE MOODS. 199
condition with the less vivid form in the apodosis. No more need be said of this use; nor need we add much about the other use of the Potential, that seen in indirect questions. The tendency of Greek has been exactly opposite to that of Latin, which by the classical period had made the optative (“subjunctive”) de rigueur in indirect questions, whatever the tense of the main verb. Greek never admitted tis εἴην = quis sim into primary sequence, and even after past tenses the optative was a refinement which Hellenistic vernacular made no effort to preserve. On Luke’s occasional use of it we need not tarry, unless it be to repeat Winer’s remark (p. 375) on Ac 21%, where the opt. is appropriate in asking about the unknown, while the accompanying indicative, “ what he has done,” suits the conviction that the prisoner had com- mitted some crime, The tone of remoteness and uncertainty
given by the optative is well seen in such a reported question
as Lk 316 μήποτε αὐτὸς εἴη ὁ Χριστός, or 22% τὸ τίς dpa εἴη ... ὁ ταῦτα μέλλων πράσσειν. It will be noted that Luke observes the rule of sequence, as he does in the use of πρίν (p. 169).
The Indicative—apart from its Future,
‘¢ Unreal . oe Indicative. Wich we have seen was originally a sub- junctive in the main—is suited by its whole character only to positive and negative statements, and not to the expression of contingencies, wishes, commands, or other subjective conceptions. We are not concerned here with the forces which produced what is called the “ unreal” use of the indicative, since Hellenistic Greek received it from the earlier age as a fully grown and normal usage, which it proceeded to limit in sundry directions. Its most prominent use is in the two parts of the unfulfilled conditional statement. We must
11t is sentences of this kind to which Goodwin’s ‘‘less vivid form” does apply: his extension of this to be the rule for the whole class I should ven- ture to dissent from—see above, p. 196 n.
2 On the general question of the obsolescence of the optative, reference may be made to F. G. Allinson’s paper in Gildersleeve Studies 353 ff., where itacism is alleged to be a contributory cause. Cf OP 60 (iv/a.D.) ἵν᾽ οὖν ἔχοιτε. . . καὶ καταστήσηται (=-e), where ἔχητε is meant; OP 71 (ib) where εἰ cot δοκοῖ is similarly a misspelt subj. (or indic.). When οὐ had become the complete equivalent of ἡ, ἢ, εἰ, and at of e, the optative forms could no longer preserve phonetic distinctness. Prof. Thumb dissents: see p. 240.
200 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
take this up among the other Conditional Sentences, in vol. ii., only dealing here with that which affects the study of the indicative as a modus irrealis, This includes the cases of omitted ἄν, and those of οὐ instead of wn. It happens that the only NT example of the latter has the former character- istic as well: Mk 14% (=Mt 26%) καλὸν αὐτῷ εἰ οὐκ ἐγεννήθη----Μῦ improves the Greek by adding ἦν. It is only the ultimate sense which makes this “unreal” at all: as far as form goes, the protasis is like Heb 12% ev ἐκεῖνοι οὐκ ἐξέφυγον, “if they failed to escape” (as they did). There, “ it was ἃ warning to us” might have formed the apodosis, and so that sentence and this would have been grammatically similar. We might speak thus of some villain of tragedy, eg. “ A good thing if (nearly = that) there never was such a man.” ‘Trans- ferred as if is to a man who is actually present, the saying gains in poignancy by the absence of the contingent form. Ei ov occurs fairly often with the indicative, but elsewhere always in simple conditions: see above, p. 171. The dropping of ἄν in the apodosis of unfulfilled conditions was classical with phrases like ἔδει, ἐχρῆν, καλὸν ἦν. Such sentences as “If he did it, it was the right thing,” may be regarded as the starting-point of the use of the indicative in unfulfilled condition, since usage can easily supply the connotation “ but he did not do it.” The addition of ἄν to an indicative apodosis produced much the same effect as we can express in writing by italicising “if”: “7f he had anything, he gave it,” or “if he had anything, in that case (ἄν) he gave it,” alike suggest by their emphasis that the condition was not realised! We need not enlarge further on this form of sentence, except to note the familiar fact that the imper- fect in all “unreal” indicatives generally denotes present time: cf the use with ὄφελον in Rev 3 and 2 Co 11}, (These are the sole NT examples of this kind of unreal indicative. The sentences of unrealised wish resemble those of unfulfilled condition further in using the aorist (1 Co 48) in reference to past time; but this could
1 Two papyrus exx. may be cited to illustrate this tendency of ἄν to drop. OP 526 (ii/A.D.) εἰ καὶ μὴ avéBeve, ἐγὼ τὸν λόγον μον οὐ wapéBevov. OP 530 (ii/a.D.) εἰ πλεῖον δέ μοι παρέκειτο, πάλιν σοι ἀπεστάλκειν.
THE VERB: THE MOODS. 201
hardly have been otherwise.!) The difference of time in the real and unreal imperfect will be seen when we drop the dy in the stock sentence εἴ te εἶχον, ἐδίδουν ἄν, “if I had anything (now), I should give it,” which by eliminating the ἄν becomes “if (ie. whenever) I had anything, I used to give it.” Goodwin (MT § 399, 410 ff.) shows that this use of the imperf. for present time is post-Homeric, and that it is not invariable in Attic—see his exx. For the NT we may cite Mt 23% 24 (7de)=Lk 12%, Jn 41° 112-82 1 Jn 219 as places where εἰ with imperf. decidedly denotes a past condition ; but since all these exx. contain either ἤμην or ἤδειν, which have no aorist, they prove nothing as to the survival of the classical ambiguity—we have to decide by the context here, a8 in all cases in the older literature, as to whether present or past time is meant. The distribution of tenses in the apodosis (when av is present) may be seen in the table on p. 166. The solitary pluperf. isin 1 Jn 213. It need only be added that these sentences of unfulfilled condition state nothing necessarily unreal in their apodosis: it is of course usually the case that the statement is untrue, but the sen- tence itself only makes it untrue “under the circumstances” (ἄν), since the condition is unsatisfied. The time of the apodosis generally determines itself, the imperfect regularly denoting present action, except in Mt 23” (ἤμεθα).
Unrealised purpose makes a minute addition to the tale of unreal indicatives in the NT. The afterthought ἔδραμον in Gal 2?, with which stands 1 Th 3°, has plenty of classical parallels (see Goodwin M7 § 333), but no further exx. are found in NT writers, and (as we saw above, p. 193 n.) the former ex. is far from certain. Such sentences often depend on unfulfilled conditions with ἄν, and the decadence of these carries with it that of a still more subtle and less practical form of language.
1 There is one ex. of ὄφελον c. fut., Gal 5!?, and there also the associations of the particle (as it now is) help to mark an expression never meant to be taken seriously. The dropping of augment in ὥφελον may be Ionic, as it is found in Herodotus ; its application to 2nd or 3rd pers. is probably due to its being felt to mean ‘‘Z would” instead of ‘‘thou shouldst,” etc. Note among the late exx. in LS (p. 1099) that with we . . . ὀλέσθαι, a first step in this develop- ment. Grimm-Thayer gives LXX parallels. See also Schwyzer Perg. 178.
CHAPTER IX. THE INFINITIVE AND PARTICIPLE.
THE mention of “ The Verb ” has been omitted Nominal Verbs in the heading of this chapter, in deference to and Verbal oy pegs . Nouns. the susceptibilities of grammarians who wax warm when λύειν or λύσας is attached to the Verb instead of the Noun. But having thus done homage to orthodoxy, we proceed to treat these two categories almost exclusively as if they were mere verbal moods, as for most practical purposes they are. Every schoolboy knows that in origin and in part of their use they belong to the noun; but on this side they have been sufficiently treated in chapters iv. and v., and nearly all that is distinctive is verbal.
Tho Infinitive :— Its Origin.
The Greek Infinitive is historically either a locative (as λύειν) or a dative (as λῦσαι, εἶναι, etc.) from a noun base closely connected with a νοῦ. We can see this fact best from a glance at Latin, where regere is obviously the locative of a noun like genus, γέρε the dative of a noun much like réx except in quantity, and rectum, -tui, -t% the accusative, dative, and loca- tive, respectively, of an action-noun of the 4th declension. In Plautus we even find the abstract noun ¢actio in the nomi- native governing its case just as if it were ¢angere. Classical Greek has a few well-known exx. of a noun or adjective governing the case appropriate to the verb with which it is closely connected. Thus Plato Apol. 18B τὰ μετέωρα φροντι- στής, Sophocles Ant.789 σὲ φύξιμος : see Jebb’s note. Vedic
1 On the morphology of the Infinitive see Giles Manual? 468 ff. It should be noted that no syntactical difference survives in Greek between forms originally
dative and those which started in the locative. 202
THE INFINITIVE AND PARTICIPLE. 203
Sanskrit would show us yet more clearly that the so-called infinitive is nothing but a case—any case—of a noun which had enough verbal consciousness in it to “ govern” an object. The isolation and stereotyping of a few of these forms produces the infinitive of Greek, Latin, or English. It will be easily seen in our own language that what we call the infinitive is only the dative of a noun: Middle English had a locative with at. In such a sentence as “He went out to toil again,” how shall we parse tou? Make it “ hard toil,” and the Noun claims it: substitute “toil hard,’ and the Verb comes to its own. One clear inference from all this is that there was originally no voice for the infinitive. Mvvartos θαυμά- oat, “capable for wondering,” and ἄξιος
αυμάσαι, “worthy for wondering,” use the verbal noun in the same way; but one means “able to wonder,” and the other “ deserving to be wondered at.” The middle and passive infinitives in Greek and Latin are merely adaptations of certain forms, out of a mass of units which had lost their individuality, to express a relation made prominent by the closer connexion of such nouns with the verb.
No voice distinction.
There are comparatively few uses of the Greek Infinitive in which we cannot still trace the construction by restoring the dative or locative case from whence it started. Indeed the very fact that when the form had become petrified the genius of the language took it up afresh and declined it by prefixing the article, shows us how persistent was the noun idea. The Imperative use, the survival of which we have noticed above (pp. 179 f.), is instructive if we are right in interpreting it in close connexion with the origins of the infinitive. A dative of purpose used as an exclamation conveys at once the imperatival idea. The frequent identity of noun and verb forms in English enables us to cite in illustration two lines of a popular hymn :—
Survivals of Case force.
“So now to watch, to work, to war, And then to rest for ever!”
A schoolmaster entering his classroom might say either “ Now then, to work!” or “at work! ”—dative or locative, express-
204 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
ing imperative 2nd person, as the hymn lines express lst person. Among the NT exx., Phil 816 has the 180,1 and the rest the 2nd person. The noun-case is equally traceable in many other uses of the infinitive. Thus the infinitive of purpose, as in Jn 215 ἁλιεύειν a-fishing, or Mt 2? προσκυνῆσαι for worshipping, —of consequence, as Heb 6° ἐπιλαθέσθαι to the extent of forgetting,—and other “complementary ” infini- tives, as Heb 11 καιρὸν ἀνακάμψαι opportunity for returning, 2 Tim 112 δυνατὸς φυλάξαι competent for guarding. The force of such infinitives is always best reached by thus going back to the original dative or locative noun.
From the account just given of the genesis of the infinitive it follows that it was originally destitute of tense as much as of voice. In classical Sanskrit the infinitive is formed without reference to the conjugation or conjugations in which a verb forms its present stem: thus / ¢ru (κλύω), inf. erotum, pres. ernomi— V γι) (tungo), yoktum, yunajmi—v/ bhit (dvo, fut, be), bhavi- tum, bhavamt. We can see this almost as clearly in Latin, where action-nouns like sonttum, positum, tactum and tactvo, etc., have no formal connexion with the present stem seen in sonat, ponit, tangit. The o in λῦσαι has only accidental similarity to link it with that in ἔλυσας. But when once these noun forms had established their close contact with the verb, accidental resemblances and other more or less capricious causes encouraged an association that rapidly grew, till all the tenses, as well as the three voices, were equipped with infinitives appropriated to their exclusive service. Greek had been supplied with the complete system from early times, and we need say nothing further on the subject here, since the infinitive presents no features which are not shared with other moods belonging to the several tenses.”
Tenses.
1 Brugmann, Gram.* 517 n., regards ws ἔπος εἰπεῖν as being for εἴπωμεν, and coming therefore under this head. It is a literary phrase, found only in Heb 79; ef the would-be literary papyrus, OP 67 (iv/A.D.). On this and other exx. of the ‘‘limitative infin.” see Griinenwald in Schanz Bettrage 11. iii. 22 ff., where it is shown to be generally used to qualify πᾶς or οὐδείς, and not as here.
2 The Hellenistic weakening of the Future infinitive, which in the papyri is very frequently used for aorist or even present, would claim attention here if. we were dealing with the Κοινή as a whole. See Kalker 281, Hatzidakis 190f., 142f. The NT does not show this form—whether any MS variants

THE INFINITIVE AND PARTICIPLE. 205
Some important questions arise from the free use in NT of the infinitive which is equivalent to ἵνα 6. subj. In ZALZ, 1903, p. 421, Prof. Thumb has some suggestive remarks on this subject. He shows that this infinitive is decidedly more prominent in the Koy than in Attic, and is perhaps an Tonic element, as also may be the infin. with τοῦ, of which the game is true. In the Pontic dialect of MGr—as mentioned above, pp. 40 f.—the old infin. survives, while it vanished in favour of νά c. subj. in European MGr, where the infin. was less prominent in ancient times.” Now the use of the infin. in Pontic is restricted to certain syntactical sequences. To these belong verbs of movement, like come, go up (cf Lk 18, Par P 49 (ii/B.c.) ἐὰν ἀναβῶ κἀγὼ προσκυνῆσαι), turn, go over, run, rise up, incline, ete. It is found that, speaking generally, the NT use agrees with this; and we find a similar correspondence with Pontic in the NT use of the infinitive after such verbs as βούλομαι, ἐπιθυμῶ, σπουδάξω. πειράξω, ἐπιχειρῶ, αἰσχύνομαι, φοβοῦμαι, ἀξιῶ, παραινῶ, κελεύω, TATOO, ἐώ, ἐπιτρέπω, δύναμαι, ἔχω, ἄρχομαι. With other verbs, as παρακαλῶ, the ἵνα construction prevails. This correspondence between ahcient and modern vernacularin Asia Minor, Thumb suggests, is best explained by assuming two tendencies within the Kot}, one towards the universalising of ἵνα, the other towards the establishment of the old infinitive in a definite province: the former prevailed throughout the larger, western portion of Hellenism, and issued in the language of modern Hellas, where the infinitive is obsolete; while the latter held sway in the eastern territory, exemplifying itself as we should expect in the NT, and showing its characteristic in the dialect spoken to-day in the same country. Prof. Thumb does not pretend to urge more than the provisional acceptance of this theory, which indeed can only be decisively accepted or rejected when we have ransacked all the available inscriptions of Asia Minor for their evidence on the use of the infinitive. But it
Infinitive of Purpose, etc.
do so I cannot say. Jn 21% has χωρήσειν (ἘΝ ΒΟ), replaced by χωρῆσαι in the later MSS ; but the future is wanted here. The aorist may be due to the loss of future meaning in χωρήσειν by the time when the late scribes wrote. The obsoleteness of fut. infin. with μέλλω in NT and papyri has been remarked already (p. 114n.). | [6 See p. 249.
205 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
is certainly very plausible, and opens out hints of exceedingly fruitful research on lines as yet unworked. The long debated question of “tva éx-
Echatic " ἵνα. βατικόν" may be regarded as settled by the new light which has come in since H. A. W. Meyer waged heroic warfare against the idea that ἵνα could ever denote anything but purpose. All motive for straining the obvious meaning of words is taken away when we see that in the latest stage of Greek language-history the infinitive has yielded all its functions to the locution thus jealously kept apart from it. That ἵνα normally meant “in order that” is beyond ques- tion. It is perpetually used in the full final sense in the papyri, having gained greatly on the Attic ὅπως. But it has come to be the ordinary construction in many phrases where a simple infinitive was used in earlier Greek, just as in Latin wt clauses, or in English those with ‘hat, usurp the prerogative of the verbal noun. “And this is life eternal, that they should know thee” (Jn 17%), in English as in the Greek, exhibits a form which under other circum- stances would make a final clause. Are we to insist on recognising the ghost of a purpose clause here?” Westcott says that ἵνα here “expresses an aim, an end, and not only a fact.” The ἵνα clause then, as compared with (τὸ) γινώ- σκειν, adds the idea of effort or aim at acquiring knowledge of God. I will not deny it, having indeed committed myself to the assumption as sufficiently established to be set down in an elementary grammar.! But I have to confess myself troubled with unsettling doubts; and I should be sorry now to commend that ἵνα as strong enough to carry one of the heads of an expository sermon!
Let us examine the grounds of this scepticism a little more closely. In Kalker’s often quoted monograph on the language of Polybius, pp. 290 ff, we have a careful presenta- tion of ἵνα as it appears in the earliest of the Kovvy writers, who came much nearer to the dialect of common life than the Atticists who followed him. We see at once that iva has made great strides since the Attic golden age. It has invaded the territory of ὅπως, as with φροντίζειν and σπου-
Ψ 3

1 Introd.? 217. (* See p. 249,
-- «α-.-. ..---

THE INFINITIVE AND PARTICIPLE. 207
δάξειν, to mention only two verbs found in the NT. The former occurs only in Tit 3°; the latter eleven times. And instead of Attic ὅπως, or Polybian ἵνα, behold the infinitive in every occurrence of the two! Under Kilker’s next head Polybius is brought into an equally significant agreement with the NT. He shows how the historian favours ἵνα after words of commanding, etc., such as διασαφεῖν, αἰτεῖσθαι, γράφειν, παραγγέλλειν, and the like. One ex. should be quoted: συνετάξατο πρός te Tavpiwva παρασκευάζειν ὑππεῖς πεντήκοντα καὶ πεζοὺς πεντακοσίους, καὶ πρὸς Μεσσηνίους, ἵνα τοὺς ἴσους τούτοις ἱππεῖς καὶ πεζοὺς ἐξαποστείλωσι. The equivalence. of infin. and ἵνα ec. subj. here is very plain. In the later Κοινή of the NT, which is less affected by literary standards than Polybius is, we are not surprised to find ἵνα used more freely still; and the resultant idiom in MGr takes away the last excuse for doubting our natural conclusions. There is an eminently sensible note in SH on Rom 11", in which the laxer use of ἵνα is defended by the demands of exegesis, without reference to the linguistic evidence. The editors also (p. 143) cite Chrysostom on 520: τὸ δὲ ἵνα ἐνταῦθα οὐκ αἰτιολογίας πάλιν ἀλλ᾽ ἐκβάσεώς
ἐστιν. It will be seen that what is said of the weakening}
of final force in ἵνα applies also to other final constructions, such as τοῦ c. infin. And on the other side we note that ὥστε in passages like Mt 271 has lost its consecutive force and expresses a purpose.” It is indeed a repetition after many centuries of a development which took place in the simple infinitive before our contemporary records begin. In the time when the dative δόμεναι and the locative δόμεν were still distinct living cases of a verbal noun, we may assume that the former was much in use to express designed result: the disappearance of distinction between the two cases, and the extension of the new “infinitive mood” over many various uses, involved a process essentially like the vanishing of the exclusively final force in the normally final constructions of Greek, Latin, and English. The burden of making purpose clear is in all these cases thrown on the context; and it cannot be said that any difficulty results, except in a minimum of places. And even in these the diffi-
culty is probably due only to the fact that we necessarily @ See p. 249.
som
208 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
read an ancient language as foreigners: no difficulty ever arises in analogous phrases in our own tongue. The suggestion of Latin influence in this Latinism ἢ development: has not unnaturally been made by some very good authorities;1 but the usage was deeply rooted in the vernacular, in fields which Latin cannot have touched to the extent which so far-reaching a change involves. A few exx. from papyti may be cited:—OP 744 (8.6) ἐρωτῶ σε ἵνα μὴ ἀγωνιάσῃς. NP 7 (i/a.v.) ἔγραψα ἵνα σοι φυλαχθώσι (cf BU 19 (ii/a.p.)). BU 531 (ii/a.p.) παρακαλῶ σε ἵνα κατάσχης. 625 (ii/iti A.D.) ἐδήλωσα Aoy- γίνῳ εἵνα ἑτυμάσῃ. ΟΡ 121 (iii/a. Ὁ.) εἶπά σοι eva δώσωσιν. ΒΜ 21 (8.6) ἠξίωσά σε ὅπως ἀποδοθῇ : ἀξιῶ ο. infin. occurs in the same papyrus. Par P 51 (ii/Bc.) λέγω... iva mpooxuynons αὐτόν. In such clauses, which remind us immediately of Mt 4° 16%, Mk 5? 3° etc, the naturalness of the development is obvious from the simple fact that the purpose clause with ἵνα is merely a use of the jussive sub- junctive (above, pp. 177 f.), which makes its appearance after a verb of commanding or wishing entirely reasonable. The infinitive construction was not superseded: cf AP 135 (ii/a.D.) ἐρωτῶ σε μὴ ἀμελεῖν μον. We need add nothing to Winer’s remarks (WM 422 f.) on θέλω and ποιῶ c. va. 1 Co 145 is a particularly good ex. under this head, in that θέλω has both constructions: we may trace a greater urgency in that with ἵνα, as the meaning demands. From such sentences, in which the object clause, from the nature of the governing verb, had a jussive sense in it which made the subjunctive natural, there was an easy transition to object clauses in which the jussive idea was absent. The careful study of typical sentences like Mt 10” 88 (contrast 311) 189, Jn 157 (contr. Lk 1619) 4% 15% 38 Lk 148 (for which Winer quotes a close parallel from Epictetus), will show anyone who is free from predisposition that ἵνα can lose the \last shred of purposive meaning.” If the recognition of a purpose conception will suit the context better than the denial
1 So Gotzeler De Polydi elocutione 17 ff. for προσέχειν ἵνα and παρακαλεῖν ἵνα μή: also Kalker op. cit., and Viereck SG 67. Against these see Radermacher RhM lvi. 208 and Thumb Hellen. 159. . 2 See further pp. 240f.
THE INFINITIVE AND PARTICIPLE. 209
of it, we remain entirely free to assume it; but the day is past for such strictness as great commentators like Meyer and Westcott were driven to by the supposed demands of grammar. The grammarian is left to investigate the extent to which the ἵνα construction ousted the infinitive after particular expressions, to observe the relative frequency of these usages in different authors, and to test the reality of Thumb’s proposed test (above, p. 205) for the geographical distribution of what may be to some extent a dialectic difference.
The consecutive infin. with ὥστε has been already alluded to as admitting some- thing very much like a purely final meaning. The total occurrences of ὥστε in the NT amount to 83, in 51 of which it takes the infin. A considerable number of the rest, however, are not by any means exx. of what we should call ὥστε consecutive with the indicative: the conjunction be- comes (as in classical Greek) little more than “and so” or “therefore,” and is accordingly found with subj. or imper. several times. Of the strict consecutive ὥστε c. indic. there are very few exx. Gal 23 and Jn 316 are about the clearest, but the line is not easy to draw. The indicative puts the result merely as a new fact, co-ordinate with that of the main verb; the infinitive subordinates the result clause so much as to lay all the stress on the dependence of the result upon its cause. Blass’s summary treatment of this construc- tion (p. 224) is characteristic of a method of textual criticism which too often robs us of any confidence in our documents and any certain basis for our grammar. “In Gal 213 there is at any rate ἃ v.l. with the infin.”—-we find in Ti “a®* συνυπαχθη- vat” —, “while in Jn 3'6 the correct reading in place of ὥστε is ὅτι, which is doubly attested by Chrys. (in many passages) and Nonnus.”* Those of us who are not impressed by such evidence might plead that the text as it stands in both places entirely fits the classical usage. It is just “the importance attaching to the result’”—to quote one of Blass’s criteria which he says would have demanded the indic. in Ac 15* in a classical writer—which accounts for the use of the indica- tive: in Jn 316, “had the other construction—oote δοῦναι, 80 much as to give—been used, some stress would have been
14 4 See Ὁ. 249.
Consequence.
210 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
taken off the fact of the gift and laid on the connexion between the love and the gift.”1 Even if the indicative construction was obsolete in the vernacular—which the evidence hardly suffices to prove—, it was easy to bring in the indicative for a special purpose, as it differed so little from the independent @®ote=and so. The infinitives without ὥστε in consecutive sense were explained above (p. 204), upon Heb 6 So in OP 526 (ii/A.D.), οὐκ ἤμην ἀπαθὴς ἀλόγως σε ἀπολείπιν, “so unfeeling as to leave you,” etc. Sometimes we meet with rather strained examples, as those in the Lucan hymns, 1572 especially. The substitution of ἵνα 6. subj. for the infin. occasionally makes ἵνα consecutive, just as we saw that ὥστε could be final: so 1 Jn 19, Rev 9”, Jn 92—where Blass’s “better reading” ὅτε has no authority earlier than his own, unless Ti needs to be supplemented. Blass quotes a good ex. from Arrian, οὕτω μωρὸς ἦν ἵνα μὴ ἴδῃ. We should not however follow him in making ἵνα con- secutive in Lk 945, for the thought of a purpose of Providence seems demanded by παρακεκαλυμμένον. 1 Th 5* we can concede, but 2 Co 117 is better treated as final: Paul is disclaiming the mundane virtue of unsettled convictions, which aims at saying yes and no in one breath. See p. 249. " The infinitive when used as subject or Infinitive as object of a verb has travelled somewhat subject OT further away from its original syntax. W object. y from its original syntax. e may see the original idea if we resolve
humanum est errare into “there is something human in erring.” But the locative had ceased to be felt when the construction acquired its commanding prevalence, and the indeclinable verbal noun could become nom. or acc. without difficulty. The ἵνα alternative appears here as it does in the purpose and consequence clauses, and (though this perhaps was mere coincidence) in the imperative use (pp. 176 and 178f.). Thus we have Mt 5” αἱ συμφέρει, Mt 1035 ἀρκετόν, Jn 18 συνήθειά ἐστιν, 1 Co 4° εἰς ἐλάχιστόν ἐστιν, Jn 48: ἐμὸν βρῶμά ἐστιν, all with ἵνα in a subject clause. See Blass’s full list, p. 228, and note his citation from “ Barnabas” 5%, ἔδει ἵνα πάθῃ : still more marked are such exx. (p. 229) as
ΤῚ quote from my Jntroduction 218, written before Blass’s book,
THE INFINITIVE AND PARTICIPLE. 211
Lk 1%, 1 Jn 53, Jn 15%, ete. The prevalence of the iva in Jn has its bearing on Prof. Thumb’s criteria described above (pp. 40 f. and 205); for if the fondness of Jn for ἐμός is a characteristic of Asia Minor, that for iva goes the other way. It would be worth while for some patient scholar to take up this point exhaustively, examining the vernacular documents among the papyri and inscriptions and in the NT, with care- ful discrimination of date and locality where ascertainable. Even the Atticists will yield unwilling testimony here; for a “wrong” use of ἵνα, if normal in the writer’s daily speech, could hardly be kept out of his literary style—there was a very manifest dearth of trained composition lecturers to correct the prose of these painful (ttérateurs of the olden time! Schmid, Aéticismus iv. 81, shows how this “ Infinitivsurrogat ” made its way from Aristotle onwards. Only by such an inquiry could we make sure that the dialectic distribution of these alternative constructions was a real fact in the age of the NT. Tentatively I should suggest—for time for such an investigation lies wholly below my own horizon—that the preference was not yet decisively fixed on geographical lines, so that individuals had still their choice open. The strong volitive flavour which clung to ἵνα would perhaps commend it as a mannerism to a.writer of John’s temperament; but one would be sorry to indulge in exegetical subtleties when he substitutes it for the infinitive which other writers prefer. 7 We might dwell on the relation of The Accusative the accus. c. infin. (after verbs of saying, a a tntitite,, believing, and the like) to the periphrasi and substitutes. g, an e like) to the periphrasis with ὅτε which has superseded it in nearly all the NT writers. But no real question as to difference of meaning arises here; and it will suffice to cite Blass’s summary (pp. 230 ff) and refer to him for details. He shows that “the use of the infinitive with words of believing
is, with some doubtful exceptions, limited to Luke and Paul
(Hebrews), being a ‘remnant of the literary language’ (Viteau [1.] 52).” So with other verbs akin to these: Luke is indeed “the only writer who uses [the acc. and infinitive] at any length, and even he very quickly passes over into the direct form.” The use of ὡς instead of ὅτι is limited, and tends to be encroached upon by πῶς: cf Hatzidakis 19, who
212 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
ought not however to have cited Ac 4" in this connexion. The combination ὡς ὅτι in 2 Co 51° 1131, 2 Th 2? is taken by Blass (Gr.? 321 f.) as equivalent to Attic ws c. gen. abs., the Vulgate quasi representing it correctly. It must be noted that in the vernacular at a rather later stage it meant merely “that”: thus CPR 19 (iv/a.p.) πρώην Bibra ἐπι- δέδωκα τῇ σῇ ἐπιμελείᾳ ὡς ὅτι ἐβουλήθην τινὰ ὑπάρχοντά μου ἀποδόσθαι. Wessely notes there, “ ὡς ὅτε seem to be combined where the single word would be adequate.” He quotes another papyrus, ὡς ὅτι χρεοστεῖται ἐξ αὐτοῦ ὁ κύρις ἸΙανός. Two Attic inscriptions of i/B.c. show ὡς ὅτε c. superl. in the sense of ὡς or ὅτε alone: see Roberts-Gardner 179. Winer (p. 771) cites Xenophon, Hellen. m1. ii. 14, εἰπὼν ὡς ὅτι oxvoln, and Lightfoot (on 2 Th 27) and Plummer repeat the reference; but the editors have agreed to eject ὅτε from the text at that place. Its isolation in earlier Greek seems adequate reason for flouting the MSS here. Winer’s citation from the Argument to the Busiris of Isocrates, κατηγόρουν αὐτοῦ ὡς ὅτι καινὰ δαιμόνια εἰσφέρει, will hardly dispose of Blass’s “ unclassical”’ (as Plummer supposes), since the argument is obviously late’ We may follow Lightfoot and Blass without much hesitation.
In classical Greek, as any fifth-form boy forgets at his peril, the nominative is used regularly instead of the accusative as subject to the infinitive when the subject of the main verb is the same: ἔφη οὐκ αὐτὸς ἀλλὰ Κλέωνα στρατηγεῖν. This rule is by no means obsolete in NT Greek, as passages like 2 Co 1032, Rom 93, Jn 7* (WH éezt), serve to show; but the ten- dency towards uniformity has produced a number of violations of it.. Heb 7% has a superfluous αὐτόν, and so has Lk 2: Mt 26%? inserts με, Phil 38:18 ἐμαυτόν, and so on Blass, p. 238 ἢ, gives instances, and remarks that translations from Latin (Viereck, SG 68) exhibit this feature® Kalker (p. 280) anticipates Viereck in regarding this as a case of propter hoc as well as post hoc. But the development of
Nominative for Accusative.
1Dr J. E. Sandys (Aristotle's Constitution of Athens, p. xxviii) makes the author of the ὑπόθεσις to the Areopayiticus ‘‘a Christian writer of perhaps the sixth century.” He kindly informs me that we may assume the same age for that to the Busiris, [5 See p. 249.
THE INFINITIVE AND PARTICIPLE. 213
Greek in regions untouched by Latin shows that no outside influence was needed to account for this levelling, which was perfectly natural. | ; The accus. c. inf. and the ὅτε construction Conte tion. have been mixed in Ac 277°, by an inadvert- ence to which the best Attic writers were liable. See the parallels quoted by Winer (p. 426), and add from humbler Greek OP 237 (ii/a.D.) δηλῶν ὅτι εἰ τὰ ἀληθῆ φανείη μηδὲ κρίσεως δεῖσθαι τὸ πρᾶγμα. Also see Wellh. 23. The Articular We will proceed to speak of the most Infinitive, Characteristic feature of the Greek infinitive in post-Homeric language. “By the sub- stantial loss of its dative force,” says Gildersleeve (AJP ii. 195), “ the infinitive became verbalised ; by the assumption of the article it was substantivised again with a decided increment of its power.” Goodwin, who. cites this dictum (M7 315), develops the description of the articular infinitive, with “its wonderful capacity for carrying dependent clauses and adjuncts of every kind,” as “a new power in the language, of which the older simple infinitive gave hardly an intimation.” The steady growth of the articular infinitive throughout the| period of classical prose was not much reduced in the Hellenistic vernacular. This is well seen by comparing the NT statistics with those for classical authors cited from Gilder- sleeve on the same page of Goodwin's MT. The highest frequency is found in Demosthenes, who shows an average of 1:25 per Teubner page, while he and his fellow orators developed the powers of the construction for taking dependent clauses to an extent unknown in the earlier period. In the NT, if my calculation is right, there is an average of ‘68 per Teubner page—not much less than that which Birklein gives for Plato. The fragmentary and miscellaneous character of the papyri make it impossible to apply this kind of test, but no reader can fail to observe how perpetual the construction is. I have noted 41 exx. in vol.1of BU (361 papyri), which will serve to illustrate the statement. An interesting line of inquiry, which we may not at present pursue very far, concerns the appearance of the articular infinitive in the dialects. Since it is manifestly developed to a high degree in the Attic orators, we should naturally attribute its fre-
214 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
quency in the Hellenistic vernacular to Attic elements in the Κοινή; and this will be rather a strong point to make against Kretschmer’s view (p. 33), that Attic contributed no more than other dialects to the resultant language. To test this adequately, we ought to go through the whole Sammlung of Greek dialect-inscriptions. I have had to content myself with a search through Cauer’s representative Delectus, which contains 557 inscriptions of all dialects except Attic. It will be worth while to set down the scanty results. First comes a Laconian inser. of ii/B.c., 32 (= Michel 182) ἐπὶ τὸ καλῶς... διεξαγνηκέναι. Then the Messenian 47 (=M. 694), dated 91 B.c., which has πρὸ τοῦ c. inf. twice, the second time with a subject in accusative. Four Cretan exx. follow, all from ii/B.c., and all in the same formula, περὶ τῶ (once Tov) γενέσθαι with accus. subject (Nos. 122—5 = M. 55, 56, 54, 60). The Gortyn Code (Michel 1333, v/s.c.) has no ex., for all its length, Then 148 (=M. 1001, the Will of Epikteta), dated cir. 200 B.c., in which we find πρὸ τοῦ τὰν σύνοδον ἦμεν.υ No. 157 (M. 417), from Calymnus, dated end of iv/B.c., is with one exception the oldest ex. we have: οἱ παραγενόμενοι πᾶσαν σπουδὰν ἐποιήσαντο τοῦ {rout διαλυθέν- τας τοὺς πολίτας τὰ ποτ᾽ αὑτοὺς πολιτεύεσθαι μετ᾽ ὁμονοίας. No. 171, from Carpathus, Michel (436) assigns to ii/B.c.: it has πρὸ τοῦ μισθωθήμειν. No. 179 (not in M.), from Priene, apparently iii/B.c., has [περὶ τ]οῦ παρορίζεσθαι tay χώραν. The Delphian inscr. no. 220 has πρὸ τοῦ παραμεῖναι. Elis contributes one ex., no. 264 (=M. 197), dated by Michel in the middle of iv/B.c., and so the oldest quoted: περὶ δὲ τῶ ἀποσταλᾶμεν. .. 70... ψάφισμα. Finally Lesbos gives us (no. 431 =M. 357), from ii/B.c., ἐπὶ τῶν πραγματευθῆναι. I have looked through Larfeld’s special collection of Bceotian inscriptions, and find not a single example. Unless the selections examined are curiously unrepresentative in this one point, it would seem clear that the articular infinitive only invaded the Greek dialects when the Koy was already . arising, and that its invasion was extremely limited in extent. To judge from the silence of Meisterhans, the Attic popular speech was little affected by it. It would seem to have been mainly a literary use, starting in Pindar, Herodotus, and the tragedians, and matured by Attic rhetoric. The statistics of
THE INFINITIVE AND PARTICIPLE. 215
Birklein (in Schanz Beitr., Heft 7) show how it extends during the lives of the great writers, though evidently a matter of personal taste. Thus Sophocles has ‘94 examples per 100 lines, Aeschylus ‘63, and Euripides only ‘37. Aristophanes has ‘42; but if we left out his lyrics, the frequency would be about the same as in Euripides. This is eloquent testimony for the narrowness of its use in colloquial speech of the Attic golden age; and the fact is significant that it does not appear in the early Acharnians at all, but as many as 17 times in the Plutus, the last product of the poet’s genius. Turning to prose, we find Herodotus showing only ‘07 examples per Teubner page, and only one-fifth of his occurrences have a preposition. Thucydides extends the use greatly, his total amounting to 298, or more than ‘5 a page: in the speeches he has twice as many as this. The figures for the orators have already been alluded to. The conclusion of the whole matter—subject to correction from the more thorough investigation which is needed for safety—seems to be that the articular infinitive is almost entirely a development of Attic literature, especially oratory, from which it passed into the daily speech of the least cultured people in the later Hellenist world. If this is true, it is enough by itself to show how commanding was the part taken by Attic, and that the literary Attic, in the evolution of the Κοινή.
The application of the articular infin. in NT Greek does not in principle go beyond what is found in Attic writers. We have already dealt with the imputation of Hebraism which the frequency of ἐν τῷ c. inf. has raised. It is used 6 times in Thucydides, 26 times in Plato, and 16 in Xenophon; and the fact that it exactly translates the Hebrew infin. with 3 does not make it any worse Greek, though this naturally in- creases its frequency. Only one classical development failed ! to maintain itself, viz. the rare employment of the infin. as a full noun, capable of a dependent genitive: thus in Demos- _ thenes, τό γ᾽ εὖ φρονεῖν αὐτῶν, “ their good sense”; or in Plato, διὰ παντὸς τοῦ εἶναι. Heb 2) διὰ παντὸς τοῦ ζῆν is an exact parallel to this last, but it stands alone in NT Greek, though Ignatius, as Gildersleeve notes, has τὸ ἀδιάκριτον ἡμῶν ζῆν. The fact that ζῆν was by this time an entirely isolated infinitive form may account for its peculiar treatment. A
216 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
similar cause may possibly contribute to the common verna- cular (not NT) phrase eis πεῖν, which we compared above (p. 81) to the Herodotean ἀντί c. anarthrous infin. The prepositions which Birklein (p. 104) notes as never used with the infin. retain this disqualification in the NT: they are, as he notes, either purely poetical or used in personal constructions. It may be worth while to give ἃ table of relative frequency for the occurrences of the articular infini- tive in.NT books. Jas has (7=) 1:08 per WH page; Heb (23=) 1:09; Lk (71=) nearly 99; Paul (106=) 89 (in Pastorals not at all); Ac (49 =) ‘7 (‘73 in ce. 1-12, 68 in cc. 13-28); 1 Pet (4=) .59; Mt (24=) :35; Mk (13 =) ‘32; Jn (4=) 076; Rev (1=) 027. [Mk] 16°” has one ex., which makes this writer's figure stand at 1:43: the other NT books have none. It will be found that Mt and Mk are about level with the Rosetta Stone.”
The general blurring of the expressions which were once appropriated for purpose, has infected two varieties of the articular infinitive. That with τοῦ started as a pure adnominal genitive, and still remains such in many places, as 1 Co 164, ἄξιον τοῦ πορεύεσθαι. But though the tod may be forced into one of the ordinary genitive categories in a fair proportion of its occurrences, the correspondence seems generally to be accidental: the extension which began in the classical period makes in later Greek a locution retaining its genitive force almost as little as the genitive absolute. The normal use of Ἰτοῦ c. inf. is telic. With this force it was specially developed by Thucydides, and in the NT this remains its principal use. We will analyse the exx. given in the concordance, omitting those in which τοῦ is governed by a preposition, and those which are due to the LXX. Mt has 6 exx.: in one of them, 21°, τοῦ πιστεῦσαι gives rather the content than the purpose of μετεμελήθητε. Luke supplies two-thirds of the total for the NT. In Lk we have 23 exx., of which 5 may be due to dependence on a noun, and about one-half
Tod c. inf.
1 But not to εἰς βάψαι, OP 736 (cir. A.D. 1), Winer (413) cites two exx. from Theodoret. See Kiibner® § 479. 2. Add an ex. with ἄχρι from Plutarch p- 256 p. An inscription of iii/B.c. (OGIS 41, Michel 370) has ἀποσταλεὶς . . . ἐπὶ τὰς παραβολὰς τῶν δικῶν λαμβάνειν : Dittenberger emends. 3. See p. 241.
THE INFINITIVE AND PARTICIPLE. 217
seem clearly final; in Ac there are 21, with 2 adnominal, and less than half final. Paul shows 13 (only in Rom, Gal, 1 and 2 Co, Phil), but there is not one in which purpose is unmistakable. In Heb there is one adnominal, one (11°) final or quasi-final. Jas 51” (object clause), 1 Pet 41” (adnominal), and the peculiar! Rev 12’ supply the remainder. Before turning to grammatical detail, let us parenthetically commend the statistics just given to the ingenious analysts who reject the unity of the Lucan books, The uniformity of use is very marked throughout Lk and Ac: cf Ac 27! (“ We ”-document) with 15*° 208, Lk 21” with Ac 9%, Ac 20” (“We”-document) with 1418 Note also the uniform pro- portion of final τοῦ, and the equality of total occurrences. When we observe that only Paul makes any marked use of τοῦ c. inf., outside Lk and Ac (the two writers together accounting for five-sixths of the NT total), and that his use differs notably in the absence of the telic force, we can hardly deny force to the facts as a contribution to the evidence on the Lucan question. In classifying the uses of this τοῦ, we note how closely it runs parallel with ἵνα. Thus Lk 17! ἀνένδεκτόν ἐστιν τοῦ... μὴ ἐλθεῖν, and Ac 10% ἐγένετο τοῦ εἰσελθεῖν (cf 3513), where the rod clause represents a pure noun sentence, in which τό would have been more correct, may be paralleled at once by πόθεν pot τοῦτο ἵνα ἔλθῃ; in Lk 1%. After verbs of commanding we may have τοῦ or iva. We find the simple infin. used side by side with
it in Lk 17 (purpose) and 1% It is not worth while to
labour any proof that purpose is not to be pressed into any example of τοῦ where the context does not demand it; but we must justify our assertion about Paul. It is not meant that there are no possible or even plausible cases of final τοῦ, but only that when Paul wishes to express purpose he uses other means. In the majority of cases τοῦ 6, inf. is epexegetic (Rom 1% 78 8!2, 1 Co 1015), adnominal (Rom 15%, 1 Co 910 164, 2 Co 8", Phil 374), or in a regular ablative construction (Rom 15%, 2 Co 18). The rendering
1 ΜῊ make this a quotation from Dan 1013. 39: the former verse names Michael, who in the latter says ἐπιστρέψω τοῦ πολεμῆσαι μετὰ κτὰ (Theodotion). See below.
218 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
“go as to” will generally express it. The nearest to pure final force are Rom 06 and Phil 31°; but in both it would be quite as natural to recognise result as purpose—the main purpose is expressed by a clause with iva in each case, and the τοῦ c. infin. comes in to expound what is involved in the purpose stated. An extreme case of explanatory infin. is that in Rev 127, where πόλεμος is explained by τοῦ πολεμῆσαι with subject in the nominative. The construction is loose even for the author of Rev, but the meaning is clear: we might illustrate the apposition by Vergil’s “et certa- men erat, Corydon cum Thyrside, magnum ;” or more closely still—if we may pursue our former plan of selecting English sentences of similar grammar and widely different sense— by such a construction as “There will be a cricket match, the champions to play the rest.”
Two other modes of expressing purpose have been, to a more limited extent, infected by the same general tendency. Πρὸς τό 6. infin. occurs 5 times in Mt and once in Mk, with clearly final force, except perhaps in Mt 5%, where it might rather seem to explain βλέπων than to state purpose. Lk 18! and Ac 3! stand alone in Luke, and the former is hardly final: we go back to a more neutral force of mpos—* with reference to the duty” (Winer). Paul has it 4 times, and always to express the “subjective purpose” in the agent’s mind, as W. F. Moulton observes (WM 414 n., after Meyer and Alford). This then is a locution in which the final sense has been very little invaded. Eis τό c. infin. is almost exclusively Pauline. It occurs thrice in Mt, in very similar phrases, all final; Mk, Lk and Ac have it once each, with final force fairly certain. Jas and 1 Pet have two exx. each, also final; and the same may probably be said of the 8 exx. in Heb. The remaining 44 exx. are evenly distributed in Paul, esp. Rom, Th, and Co—none in Col, Philem and the Pastorals. Westcott on Heb 5! distinguishes between ἵνα and eis τό, which he notes as occurring in close connexion in a considerable number of passages: “iva appears to mark in each case the direct and immediate end, while εἰς ro indicates the more remote result aimed at or reached.” This seems to be true of both tod and
Πρὸς τό and εἰς τό ὁ. infin.
THE INFINITIVE AND PARTICIPLE. 219
eis to. Since we have seen that ἕνα itself has largely lost its appropriation to telic force, it would naturally follow that εἰς τό would lose it more easily: on the whole, however, this is hardly the case. On Heb 11%, Moulton and Westcott, independently, insist on the perseverance of the final meaning, in view of the writer's usage elsewhere. The εἰς τὸ γεγονέναι (mark the: perfect) will in this case depend on κατηρτίσθαι, and describe a contemplated effect of the fiat in Gen 1. Paul’s usage is not so uniform. It is difficult to dispute Burton’s assertion (4/7 § 411) that in Rom 128, 2 Co 8%, Gal 3:7 (not, I think, in 1 Th 216) εἰς τό “expresses tendency, measure of effect, or result, conceived or actual.” Add (with WM 414n.) exx. of εἰς ro expressing the content of a command or entreaty (as 1 Th 2%), or acting for the epexegetic inf. (1 Th 4°). Purpose is so remote here as to be practically evanescent. We must however agree with SH in rejecting Burton’s reasoning as to Rom 1”; for this belongs to the category of passages dealing with Divine action, in which contemplated and actual results, final and consecutive clauses, necessarily lose their differentia. It has been often asserted—cf especially a paper by Mr A. Carr on “ The Exclusion of Chance from the Bible,” in Hapos, v. viii. 181 ff—that Hebrew teleology is responsible for the blurring of the di:tinction between pur- pose and consequence: it 1s a “subtle influence of Hebrew thought on the grammar. of Hellenistic Greek.” This might be allowed—as a Hebraism of thought, not language—in passages like that last mentioned, where the action of God is described. But the idea that “Hebrew teleology” can have much to do with these phenomena as a whole is put out of court by the appearance of the same things in lan- guage which Semitic influences could not have touched. We have already shown this for ἵνα. A few exx. may be cited for τοῦ from vernacular witnesses:—BU 665 (i/aA.D.) ἀμελεῖν τοῦ γράφειν. BU 830 (i/a.D.) χρὴ οὖν ἑτοιμάσειν καὶ προαιρεῖν, i’ ἔχι τοῦ πωλεῖν: cf Mt 18%, Jn 57, for parallel construc-
Evidence of the Papyri, etc.
1 See Findlay CGT in loc., where strong reasons are given for accepting Ellicott’s interpretation, seeing here the purpose of God.
220 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
tions with ἔχω. BU 1031 (ii/aA.v.) φρόνησον τοῦ ποιῆσαι. JHS, 1902, 369 (Lycaonian inscr., iii/a.D. or earlier) τῷ διχοτομήσαντί με τοῦ «τὸ λοεπὸν ξῆν els (cause). NP 16 (iii/A.D.) κωλύοντες τοῦ μὴ σπείρειν : cf Lk 445, Ac 148, ete. BU 36 (ii /iii A.D.) τοῦ ζῆν μεταστῆσαι: οὗ 2 Co 1% BU 164 (ii/iii A.D.) παρακαλῶ σε... πεῖσαι αὐτὸν τοῦ ἐλθεῖν. BM 28 (ii/B.c.) προσδεομένου μου τοῦ περιποιῆσαι. BU 595 (i/A.D.) τοῦ σὲ pe εὑρεθῆναι, apparently meaning “ because of your not being found,” as if τῷ : the document is illiterate and naturally ejects the dative. OP 86 (iv/a.p.) ἔθος ἐστὶν τοῦ παρασχεθῆνα. OP 275 (i/a.D.) τοῦ ἀποσπαθῆναι ἐπίτειμον.. CPR 156 ἐξουσίαν... tov... θέσθαι: οἵ 1 Co 9% BU 46 ({4.Ρ.) εὐκαιρίας... τοῦ εὑρεῖν : οἵ Lk 225, BU 625 (ii/iii aD.) πᾶν ποίησον τοῦ σὲ ἀπενέγκε: so 845 (ii/a.D.). The usage is not common in the papyri. Winer’s plentiful testimony from LXX, Apocrypha, and Byzantine writers (WM 411) illustrates what the NT statistics suggest, that it belongs to the higher stratum of education in the main. For εἰς τό we may quote the re- current formula εἰς τὸ ἐν μηδενὶ μεμφθῆναι, which is decidedly telic: as PFi 2 (iii/a.p.) quater, OP 82 (iii/a.D.). Miscel- laneous exx. may be seen in OP 69 (ii/a.p.), BU 18 (ii/a.v.), 195 (ii/a.p.), 243 (ii/a.p.), 321 (iii/a.D.), 457 (ii/a.p.), 651 (ii/a.D.), 731 (ii/a.D.), and 747 (ii/a.p.). Like the rather commoner πρὸς τό, it seems to carry the thought of a remoter purpose, the tendency towards an end. This is well shown by the cases in which the main purpose is represented by ἵνα or ὅπως, and an ultimate object is tacked on with the articular infinitive. Thus BU 226 (i/a.D.) ὅπως εἰδῇ παρέσεσται (= -θαι) αὐτὸν... ὅταν KTrA . . . πρὸς TO τυχῖν με τῆς ἀπὸ σοῦ βοηθείας. OP 237 (ii/A.D.) ὅπως φροντίσῃς ἀκόλουθα πρᾶξαι. .. πρὸς τὸ μὴ περὶ τῶν αὐτῶν πάλιν αὐτὸν ἐντυγχάνειν. ἰδ. [ἵνα] δ᾽ οὖν... διαμένῃ .. . ἢ χρῆσεις πρὸς τὸ μὴ πάλιν ἀπογραφῆς δεηθῆναι. This kind of final force is just what we have seen in nearly all the NT exx.; nor do those in which the purpose is least evident go beyond what we see in these other illustrations.
Before dealing with the Participle proper, we may
1Cf 2 Co 218; LPb (ii/B.c.) ἄλλως δὲ τῷ μηθέν᾽ ἔχειν πλὴν τοῦ Πτολεμαίου.
THE INFINITIVE AND PARTICIPLE. 221
briefly touch on another category closely connected with it. Brugmann has shown (ldg. Forsch. v. 89 ff.) that the _.. Greek participle, formed with the suffixes The Participle 1+. meno-, and -wos- (-us-), represents the and the Verbal ads τς . ΜΝ Adjectives, Proéthnic participle, which was intimately connected with the tense system; while there are primitive verbal adjectives, notably that in -to-, which in other languages—Latin and English are obvious examples—have become associated more intimately with the verb. The -τός form in Greek has never come into the verb system; and its freedom from tense connexions may be seen from the single fact that “amatus est” and “he is loved” represent different tenses, while “scriptwm est.” and “it is written” agree Even in Latin, a word like ¢acitus illustrates the absence of both tense and voice from the adjective in its primary use. Brugmann’s paper mainly concerns Latin and the Italic dialects, and we shall only pursue the subject just as far as the interpretation of the Greek -ros calls us. The absence of voice has just been remarked on. This is well shown by the ambiguity of ἀδύνα- tov in Rom 88: is it “incapable,” as in Ac 148, Rom 15}, or “impossible,” as in the other NT occurrences? Grammar cannot tell us: it is a purely lexical problem. As to absence of fense, we may note that both in Greek and English this adjective is wholly independent of time and of “ Aktionsart.” Both ἀγαπητός and beloved may answer indifferently to ἀγαπώμενος, ἠγαπημένος, and ἀγαπηθείς. This fact has some exegetical importance. Thus in Mt 254 the timeless adjective “cursed” would answer to the Greek κατάρατοι. The perfect κατηραμένοι has the full perfect force, “having become the subjects of a curse”; and this makes the predicate translation (RVmg “under a curse”) decidedly more probable. That our -d (-n) participle has no tense force in itself, and that consequently we have no exact representative of either present, aorist or perfect participle passive in Greek, is a point that will often need to be borne in mind. The very word just used, borne, translates the
1 The verbal adjective in -no- stands parallel with that in -to- from primitive times.
222 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
present αἰρόμενον in Mk 23, while its punctiliar equivalent brought represents (RVmg) the aorist ἐνεχθεῖσαν in 2 Pet 118, and the similar taken away stands for ἠρμένον in Jn 201: and yet all these are called “past participle” in English grammars. Having cleared the way for a lexical treatment of the verbals in -τός, by leaving usage in each case to decide whether an intransitive, an active, or a passive meaning is to be assigned to each word, we may give two or three examples which will lead to a new point. vveros is a good example of an ambiguous word: it is always active, “intelligent,” in NT, but in earlier writers it is also passive. LS cite Euripides 711 1092 εὐξύνετος ξυνετοῖσε Bod as combining the two. “*Acuveros in Rom 151 is also active, but the next word ἀσύνθετος, combined with it by paronomasia, gets its meaning from the middle συνθέσθαι, “ not covenanting.” An example of the passive, and at the same time of the free use of these adjectives in composition, is θεοδέδακτος “ God- taught.” Intransitive verbs naturally cannot show passive meaning. Thus ξεστός fervidus, from ξέ(σ)ω “to boil.” But when we examine θνητός, we see it does not mean “dying” but “mortal”; παθητὸς is probably not “suffering” but “capable of suffering,” patibilis. So often with transitive verbs. “The ‘invincible’ Armada” would be rendered ὁ ἀήττητος δὴ στόλος : tnvictus would be similarly used in Latin, and “unconquered” can be read in that sense in English. A considerable number of these adjectives answer thus to Latin words in -dzlzs, as will be seen from the lexicon: we need cite no more here. It will be enough merely to mention the gerundive in -réos, as it is only found in Lk 5%, βλητέον “one must put.” It is not unknown in the papyvri, but can hardly have belonged to the genuine popular speech. τς A considerable proportion of what we Participle for jive to say about the Participle has Ὁ Indicative. ες δ) amviciple Has been anticipated. One Hellenistic use, already adumbrated in the discussion of the Imperative (pp. 180 ff), may be finished off at this point, before we go on to describe subordinate participial clauses. That the participle can be used for indicative or imperative seems to be fairly estab- lished now by the papyri. Let us present our evidence before applying it to the NT exx., which we have already
THE INFINITIVE AND PARTICIPLE. 223
given so far as the imperative is concerned. For indicative the following may be cited:—Tb P 14 (ii/B.c) τῶι οὖν σημαινομένων Ηρᾶτι παρηγγελκότες ἐνώπιον, “1 gave notice in person” (no verb follows). Tb P 42 (ἰ2.) ἠδικημένος (no verb follows). AP 78 (ii/a.D.) βίαν πάσχων ἑκάστοτε, etc. (no verb). Tb P 58 (ii/B.c.) γράψας ὅπως εἰδῇς, καὶ σὺ ἀναγωνίατος ἴσθει. NP 49 (iii/aD.) ὅτε “,. . ἐξαγρήσαντες
ες Kal... σφετερίσαντες, καὶ ἀἁπάντηκα αὐτοῖς... Οἱ GH 26 (ii/B.c.), ὃ συνεπικελευούσης τῆς τούτων μητρὸς Θρῆρις τῆς Παῶτος συνευδοκοῦντες τῶν προγεγρα(μμένων), the edd. remark: “ The construction is hopeless; one of the participles συνεπικ. or cuvevd. must be emended to the indicative, and the cases altered accordingly.” The writer of the papyrus uses his cases in a way which would have convicted him of Semitic birth before any jury of NT grammarians not very long ago; but if συνευδοκοῦμεν is meant by the cuvev- δοκοῦντες, we may perhaps translate without emendation, taking τῶν π. as partitive gen. like Ac 2116 (supr., p. 73). In Par P 63 (ii/B.c.) ἔντευξιν ἡμῖν προφερόμενοι comes in 80 long a sentence that the absence of finite verb may be mere anacoluthon. OP 725 (ii/a.D.) ὁ δὲ “H. εὐδοκῶν τούτοις πᾶσι καὶ ἐκδειδάξειν, “ H. agrees to all this, and to teach,” etc. In CPR 4 (i/a.p.), καὶ μηδένα κωλύοντα, for κωλύειν, seems to be the same thing in oraé. odl., but more clearly due to anaco- luthon. For the imperative there is the formula seen in G 35 (i/B.c.) ἑαυτῶν δὲ ἐπιμελόμενοι ἵν᾽ ὑγιαίνητε (1st person plural precedes): so Par P 63,G 30, Path P 1, Tb P 12 (all Ptolemaic), etc. FP 112 (i/ap, translated above, p. 178) ἐπέχον (= -wv) Zwidor καὶ elva αὐτὸν μὴ δυσωπήσῃς. Tb P 59 (i/B.c.) ἐν ols ἐὰν προσδέησθέ pov ἐπιτάσσοντές μοι mpoOuporepov-—following a gen. abs. (This is a letter from “an official of some importance” (G. & H.), who bears the Greek name Posidonius. We may observe that the parti- cipial use we are discussing is in the papyri not at all a mark of inferior education.) It will be seen that the use, though fairly certain, was not in the vernacular very common. It may be recalled that in a prehistoric stage Latin used the participle for an indicative, where the 2nd plur. middle for some reason became unpopular ; and sequimini = ἑπόμενοι not only established itself in the present, but even produced
224 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
analogy-formations in future and imperfect, and in the subjunc- ᾿ς tive Cf the constant ellipsis of est in perfect indic. passive. If further analogies may be permitted, we might refer to the plaus- ible connexion claimed between the 3rd plural indicative and the participle in all languages of our family: bheronts ( ferunt, φέρουσι, Gothic bairand, etc.), and bheront- (ferens, φέρων, batrands). These analogies are only adduced to show that the use of the participle always lay ready to hand, with or without the auxiliary verb, and was a natural resource whenever the ordinary indicative (or, less often, imperative) was for any cause set aside. In D we find this use apparently arising from the literal translation of Aramaic: see Wellh. 21. We may proceed to give some NT passages in which the participle appears to stand for an indicative: those where the imperative is needed were given on pp. 180 ff. As before, we shall begin with those from Winer’s list (p. 441 f.) in which we may now reject his alternative construction. Rom 5" καυχώμενοι is most naturally taken this way: Winer’s explana- tion seems forced. 1, and the rest correctly glossed the true reading with their καυχώμεθα. In Heb 7? we might have to take refuge in explaining ἑρμηνενόμενος as an indicative, if we felt ourselves tied to ὃς συναντήσας in v.1, which is read by SABC?DEK 17. But it seems clear that we may here accept the conjecture of C*LP and the later MSS, the doubled sigma being a primitive error parallel with those in 11 γυναῖκας (NAD and the new Oxyrhynchus papyrus) and 114 αὐτοῦ τῷ Θεῷ (where Hort’s αὐτῷ τοῦ Θεοῦ is now found ‘in the papyrus, as well as in Clement): this is an excellent witness to the scrupulous accuracy of the 8-text in preserving even errors in its ancient source. In Heb 8:0 1018 διδούς is parallel to évypdyo, if the order of thought is to ke maintained: the LXX had διδοὺς δώσω, but AQ and Heb omit δώσω (because there was only the simple Qal in the Hebrew 2), leaving διδούς to do the work of an indicative. Winer (p. 717) would make ἐπυγράψω a substitute for parti- ciple, as in Col 1%, 1 Co 7%’, ete. In Ac 245 εὑρόντες arrives at the goal by the way of anacoluthon—-Luke cruelly reports
1 Sequimini imperative has a different history: cf the old infinitive ἑπέμεναι, Skt. sacamane. See p. 241.
THE INFINITIVE AND PARTICIPLE, 225
the orator verbatim. In 2 Co 75 θλιβόμενοι is most simply taken in this way: perhaps παρεκλήθημεν was in mind for the main verb. ᾿Απαγγέλλων in the a-text (HLP and cur- sives) of Ac 2639 would be explained thus, though the influence of ἐγενόμην is still consciously present: were this a marked irregularity, the Syrian revisers would hardly have admitted it. In Rom 128 ἔχοντες is I think for ἔχομεν : see above, p. 183. In Rev 10? ἔχων is for εἶχεν: Winer allows that “ ἐστί [rather ἦν] may be supplied.” So 2124, A different class of participle altogether is that coming under the head of “hanging nominative,” which our own nominative absolute translates so exactly that we forget the genitive presumed in the Greek. Heb 101 will be a case in point if the text is sound— Westcott and Peake accept δύναται, which is strongly supported by the combination DH boh vg: the RV (so W. F. Moulton, Comm. in loc.) follows the construction expressly vouched for by Theophylact, reading ἔχων as an “absolute clause.” In Phil 189 ἔχοντες similarly takes the place of a gen. abs. (or dat. agreeing with vutvy)—the construction is taken up as if ἐλάβετε had precéded.!_ The idiom in fact is due merely to anacoluthon: see other exx. in WM 716 and Jannaris HG 500. Answering Viteau, who as usual sees Hebraism here, Thumb observes (Hellenismus 131) that the usage is found in classical Greek, and in Hellenistic both in and outside Biblical Greek, “and is the precursor of the process which ends in MGr with the disappearance of the old participial constructions, only an absolute form in -ovras being left.” This construction is identical, to be sure, with the nom. pendens unaccompanied by the participle: it is as common in English as in Greek, and just as “ Hebraistic” in the one as in the other.
We saw when we first introduced the participial substitute for indicative or impera- tive (p. 182), that its rationale was practically the suppression of the substantive verb. Our next subject will therefore naturally be the use of the participle in peri-
Participles with εἶναι.
1 Lightfoot rejects the alternative punctuation (WH) which would treat ἥτις... πάσχειν as a parenthesis. So Kennedy (6717 in loc.)—rightly, it seems to me. .
15
220 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
phrastic tenses. Since the question of Semitism is rather acute here, we will deal with it first. Blass (pp. 202 ff.) discovers the influence of Aramaic especially in the peri- phrastic imperfect: in the case of Mt, Mk, Lk and Ac 1-12 “this is no doubt due to their being direct translations from Aramaic originals ”——“ based on direct translations,’ would be a better way to put it. Schmid (Adie. 111. 113f) has a valuable note, in which, after sketching the extent of this periphrasis in classical Greek and literary Kovvy, he remarks that in Par P he can only find it in future-perfects, and twice in optative with aor. participle. Comparing this scanty result with “the extraordinary abundance of the participial periphrasis in NT . . ., one cannot avoid separating the NT use from that of the Κοινή, and deriving it from the Heb. and Syr. application of the participle.” We can of course have no objection to this, within limits. In translated Greek, as we have seen again and again, we expect to find over-literal renderings, — still more to find an overdoing of correct idioms which answer exactly to locutions characteristic of the language rendered. The latter is the case here. No one denies that periphrasis is thoroughly Greek: see the page and a half of classical exx. in Kihner-Gerth 1. 38 ff. It is only that where Aramaic sources underlie the Greek, there is inordinate frequency of a use which Hellenistic has not conspicuously developed. Cf Wellh. 25. The exx. in Jn (see Blass 203 n.) and Paul we may treat on purely Greek lines. By way of further limiting the usage, we observe that the imperfect is the only tense in which corre- spondence with Aramaic is close enough to justify much of a case for dependence. No less an authority than Wellhausen warns us not to carry the thesis into the imperative: “Ἴσθι in imperative before participle or adjective often occurs (Mk 5%, Lk 1917}, and in consideration of Prov 3° LXX is not to be treated as an Aramaism” (Comm. on Mt 5%). Then we note the papyrus usage. [ἔχων ἐστί and δέον ἐστί (with other impersonal verbs) are both classical and vernacular. The future ἔσομαι c. perf. part. is well kept up in the papyri, and so is the periphrastic pluperfect: thus, OP 285 (i/a.D.) ὃν ἤμην ἐνδεδυμένος χιτῶνα, Par P 8 (ii/B.c.) ὧν ἤμην δι’ αὐτῶν παραμεμετρηκυῖα. There can be no thought of Aramaisms
THE INFINITIVE AND PARTICIPLE. 227
here. But BU 183 (i/a.D.), ἐφ᾽ ὃν χρόνον ζῶσα ἢ, is rather limited illustration for the present participle in this usage. Winer however cites Lucian, observing that its common appear- ance in the LXX “ was but seldom suggested by the Hebrew.” As to classical Greek, note Dr W. G. Rutherford’s suggestive little paper, CR xvii. 249, in which he shows that the idiom imparts a special emphasis. So in Thue. iv. 54 ἦσαν δέ τινες καὶ γενόμενοι τῷ Νικίᾳ λόγοι, “some proposals were even actually made to N.” Antiphon (Fr. M. 8. 67) ἦν ὁ γρῖφος ἐνταῦθα ῥέπων, “the puzzle did indeed mean as much.” Aristoph. Ach. 484 ἕστηκας οὐκ εἶ καταπιὼν Εὐριπίδην ; “afraid to go! not effectually saturated with Euripides!” May we not apply this in the originally Greek parts of NT—eg. Gal 1%, “TI was entirely unknown ... only they had been hearing ...”? Paul has only one other ex. in imperfect, Phil 276, where ἐπιποθῶν and ἀδημονῶν seem decidedly adjec- tival, and not at all improved by reading them as imperfect. (No one would cite 2 Co 5.) Blass well remarks that in Jn “in most passages ἦν has a certain independence of its own”; and he further notes that in Ac 13-28, where Aramaic sources are almost entirely absent, the Semitisms fail, except in 2219. in a speech delivered in Aramaic. The total number of exx. of pres. partic. with imperf. of εἶναι is for Mt 3 (only 7” possibly Aramaising), Mk 16, Lk 30, Ac (1-12) 17, (13-28) 7, Jn 10, Paul 3,1 Pet 1.1 Large deductions would have to be made from these figures, on any theory, to get the maximum of exx. for the supposed literal translation of an Aramaic periphrastic imperfect. Even in Mk and Luke the ἦν is generally very distinct from the participle; and whatever was the Aramaic original, we may be quite sure that such expressions as we find in Mk 10* or Lk 4% owe nothing to it in this way. See p. 249.
The participle as a whole has diverged so little from earlier usage that we have not very much more to say. The ¢enses need no further discussion in this volume; and for our present purpose little need be added to what was said about the articular participle on pp. 126f. An
11 count ἑστώς asa present, but omit ἐξὸν ἣν. Jn 19 is included, but not Lk 3°73,
228 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
idiomatic use of ὁ ὧν may be noted in Ac 13! κατὰ τὴν οὖσαν ἐκκλησίαν, “the local church,” 1418 Ὁ τοῦ ὄντος Atos Articular Προπόλεως (or πρὸ πόλεως). Cf Ramsay's Participle. remark (Ch. in Rom. Limp. 52, quoting J. A. Robinson), that in Ac ὁ ὧν “introduces some
technical phrase, or some term which it marks out as having a technical sense (cf 5'” 131 28”), and is almost equivalent to τοῦ ὀνομαζομένου. Dean Robinson has not mentioned this in his note on Eph 1], though an ingenious person might apply it there to the text with ἐν ᾿Εφέσῳ absent ; but the usual view needs no defence against such an alternative. With ai οὖσαι in Rom 13! we may compare Par P 5 (ii/B.c.) ἐφ᾽ ἱερέων καὶ ἱερειῶν τῶν ὄντων καὶ οὐσῶν. On the crucial passage Rom 9° see SH p. 235 f., with whom I agree, though the argument that “He who is God over all,” would have to be ὁ ἐπὶ π. θ. might perhaps be met by applying the idiom noted above for Ac, with a different nuance. Θεός may still be subject, not predicate, without making ὦν otiose: the consciousness of Ex 3 might fairly account for its insertion. It is exegesis rather than grammar which makes the reference to Christ probable. One other Pauline passage claims a brief note, Col 2°, where the natural ὃς συλαγωγήσει is replaced by ὁ συλαγωγῶν, to give “ direct- ness and individuality to the reference” (Lightfoot). Rela- tive clauses are frequently ousted by the articular participle, which (as Blass observes) had become synonymous therewith. There is a marked diminution in the use of the parti- ciple with verbs like τυγχάνω, ἄρχομαι, λανθάνω, φαίνομαι, etc. But this was, partly at any rate, mere accident, for τυγχάνω c. part. is exceedingly common in the papyri: “I happen to be” is a phrase NT writers would instinctively avoid. Karas ποιήσεις ὁ. aor. part. (once or twice infin., but the participle is overwhelmingly predominant) is the normal way of saying “please” in the papyri, and is classical. So 3 Jn®, and in the past Ac 1088, Phil 434: cf 2 Pet 1% I cannot agree with Blass’s “ incorrectly ed πράσσειν in Ac 15” (p. 245)—
Participle as Complement.
1 Cf such phrases as τοῦ ὄντος μηνὸς χοιάκ, NP 49 (iii/a.p.), ‘‘the current month.”
THE INFINITIVE AND PARTICIPLE. 929
except in the query he attaches to the remark. Surely this
. 1g an ordinary conditional sentence, “If you keep yourselves
free from these things, you will prosper”? Εὖ ποιήσετε, from vernacular usage, would suggest “you will oblige us”; but Blass can hardly mean this. With verbs like olda, ὁμολογῶ, μανθάνω, the participle is being encroached upon: it appears regularly in 2 Co 123, 1 Jn 4? (not B), 2 Jn’, Lk 84. Ac 2410 but is generally replaced by acc. and inf. or a ὅτι clause. So Par P 44 (ii/Bc.) γίνωσκέ pe πεπορεῦσθαι, and the recurrent γινώσκειν oe θέλω ὅτι: for the participle we can quote BU 151 (Christian period—ic&), TP 1 (ii/ae. —oporoyos), NP 1 (ii/a.D.—el μάθοιμε, the optative of which suggests culture). Of course Phil 41, ἔμαθον... εἶναι “I have learned how to be,” is classically correct: 1 Tim 573 is in any case no ex. of μανθάνω c. part., for this could only mean “learn that they are going about.” (The RV rendering is supported by Winer with Plato Huthyd. 2708 οἱ ἀμαθεῖς dpa σοφοὶ μανθάνουσι, and the parallel phrase διδάσκειν τινὰ σοφόν: Field adds from Chrysostom εἰ ἰατρὸς μέλλεις μανθάνειν, with other parallels. The construction—pavOave as passive of d:dacxw—is not unnatural in itself. Despite Weiss, the absolute μανθ. seems intolerable, and there is no real alternative, unless with Blass we boldly insert εἶναι.)
We come then to the manifold uses of the participle as forming an additional clause in the sentence. This is one of the great resources of Greek, in which the poverty of Latin shows markedly by contrast. Our own language comes much nearer, but even with the help of auxiliaries we cannot match the wealth of Greek: thus, we cannot by our participle distinguish λελυκώς and λύσας. The elasticity of Greek however has its disadvantages, such as the possibility of supplying in translation particles as widely apart as because and although. But it seldom happens that serious ambiguity arises from this absence of strict logical differentiation.
We need spend little space in classifying participial usages. We have already seen (pp. 170 f.) that one important criterion has disappeared in Hellenistic, by the encroachments
: of μή over the whole field, when in classical In Conditional, Greek it was essentially conditional We
Participial Clauses.
230 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
return to this point presently. The participle in conditional clauses is still found very freely. It stands for ἐάν c. aor. subj. in Lk 935 compared with Mt 16%; for εἰ c. pres. indic. in 1 Co 11%. There seem to be no exx. of its sub- stitution for εἰ ὁ. opt., or εἰ c. indic. irreal.; but this is an accident, due to the relatively small number of sentences of » the kind. Another class is called by Blass “conjunctive”: 1 Tim 1% ἀγνοῶν ἐποίησα (cf Ac 517) is his ex. In Mt 67? we have a choice—*“ Who can by worrying,” or “even 7f he does worry, add a span to his life?” Concessive clauses are often expressed with the participle alone: Rom 1 “though they know,” Jas 34 “big though they are,” 1 Co 9” “free though I am,” Jude® (not causal, as Winer), etc. Where ambiguity is possible, we sometimes find the meaning fixed by καίπερ, a8 Phil 34, 2 Pet 115, and Heb ¢er; once by καΐτοι, Heb 43, καὶ ταῦτα Heb 11%, or καί ye Ac 1727 -—note the ov there surviving, with characteristic emphasis. The opposite causal sense is ex- ceedingly common: so Ac 451, Heb 6% (unless temporal), Jas 2%, Mt 17, etc. Purpose is less often expressed by the parti- Final, ciple, as the future was decaying:! we have however Mt 2739, and two or three in Luke.
The present sometimes fulfils this function, as in Ac 15%, Finally come the temporal clauses, or those which describe Temporal and the attendant circumstances of an action: eg. Attendant Mt 13? ὥστε αὐτὸν εἰς πλοῖον ἐμβάντα καθ- Circumstances ἥσθαι, “when he had entered, he sat down.” ? Clauses. We should not usually put a temporal clause to represent these, as it would overdo the emphasis: in comparatively few cases, like Ac 17! and similar narra- tive passages, we might replace with ἐπεί or ὅτε. Our English participle is generally the best representative, unless we change it to the indicative with and: Latin, unless the ablative absolute can be used, necessarily has recourse to cum c. subj., its normal method of expressing attendant circumstances. The pleonastic participles λαβών, ἀναστάς,
“ Conjunctive,
Concessive,
Causal,
1 It was not however by any means dead: cf the string of final fut. parti- ciples in OP 727 (ii/a.p.) ; BU 98 (iii/a.p.) ete. 2 See p. 241.
THE INFINITIVE AND PARTICIPLE. 231
πορευθείς, ἀπελθών, largely occurring in translated passages, have been already referred to (p. 14). One interesting Aramaism may be noted here from Wellhausen (p. 22). He asserts that in Mk 217 λαλεῖ βλασφημεῖ (without stop) liter- ally translates two Aramaic participles, the second of which should in Greek appear as a participle. In Lk 22® we find βλασφημοῦντες ἔλεγον correctly. But it must be noted that with the RV punctuation Mk lc. is perfectly good Greek, so that we have no breach of principle if we do allow this account of the passage.
The large use of participles in narrative, both in gramma- tical connexion with the sentence and in the gen. abs. con- struction (p. 74), is more a matter of style than of grammar, and calls for no special examination here.
We may close our discussion with some notes on the places in which the ordinary rule, that μή goes with the participle, is set aside. The number of passages is not large, and they may well be brought together.! Mt (2211) and Jn (1013) have one each; Luke (Lk 642, Ac 75 2672 281" 1%) five; and there are two each in Heb (111%) and 1 Pet (18 2!—a quotation). Paul has eight passages (Rom 9% and Gal 457 bis—dquoted ; 1 Co 976, 2 Co 4° quater, Gal 48, Phil 38, Col 219. 1 Th 24). Before discussing them, let us put down some papyrus exx. for ob. OP 471 (ii/a.D.) τὸν οὐκ ἐν λευκαῖς ἐσθῆσιν ἐν θεατρῷ καθίσαντα: cf Mt Lc. OP 491 (ii/A.D.) ἐὰν τελευτήσω οὐδέπω πεπληρωκότων (when they are not yet 25). AP 78 (ii/a.D.) οὐ δυνάμενος ἐγκαρτερεῖν ἐπιδίδωμι: contrast 1 Th 31. ΟΡ 726 (ii/a.D.) οὐ δυνάμενος δι’ ἀσθένειαν πλεῦσαι since he cannot): so 727 (ii/aD.). Tb P 41 (8.6) οὐ στοχασά- μενος (=-0v) ὧν ἔχομεν. . . πίστεων (in a long gen. abs. succession): so Par P 40 οὔτε τοῦ ἱεροῦ στοχασάμενοι οὔτε τοῦ καλῶς ἔχοντος. Par P 1:3 (ii/BC.) κρατοῦσιν οὐκ ἀναπέμ- ψαντες τὴν φέρνην. Th P 34 (ii/BC.) μὴ παρανοχλείθω (sic) ὑπ’ οὐδενός. BU 861 (1{.}.) χώραν οὐκ ἔχει, οὐκ ἐπιστά- μενος τί ἐκεῖνος amexpeivato. See also Par P 14, OP 286 (i/a.D.), TP 1 (ii/B.c.), 3 and 8 (ii/B.c.). In many of these
οὐ with . participle.
1] omit οὐκ ἐξόν, used for indic., and the common vernacular phrase οὐχ ὁ τυχών.
232 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
exx. we can distinctly recognise, it seems, the lingering. con- sciousness that the proper negative for a statement of a downright fact is ov. The same feeling may have made ov rise to the lips when an emphatic phrase was wanted, as in the illiterate Tb P 34 above. The closeness of the participle to the indicative in the kinds of sentence found in this list makes the survival of ov natural. Much the same principles may be applied to the NT, though in Luke, Paul and Heb we have also to reckon with the literary consciousness of an educated man, which left some of the old idioms even where μή had generally swept them away. In two passages we have ov and μή in close contact. Mt 22" (see parallel above) is followed in the king’s question by πῶς εἰσῆλθες ὧδε μὴ ἔχων ...; The distinction is very natural: the first is a plain fact, the second an application of it. The emphasis would have been lost by substituting py. In Pallis’s MGr version of the Gospels the two phrases are alike translated with δέν and indic. (The completeness of ΜΟῚ levelling is well illustrated by his version of Lk and Jn Idee. The former becomes «al... δὲν c. indic.; the latter is καὶ βοσκὸς μὴν ὄντας, followed by ποὺ δὲν εἶναι ta πρόβατα δικά του, “whose own the sheep are not.” Outside the indicative δέν is not found.) 1 Pet 18 is best left to Hort: “The change of negative participles . . . is not capricious. The first is a direct statement of historical fact; the second is introduced as it were hypothetically, merely to bring out the full force of πιστεύοντες. Though Blass thinks it arti- ficial to distinguish, it is hard to believe that any but a slovenly writer would have brought in so rapid a change without any reason. The principles already sketched may be applied to the remaining passages without difficulty, in so far as they are original Greek. In the quotations from the LXX we have, as Blass notes, merely the fact that Nd c. partic. was regularly translated with ov. The passages in question would also come very obviously under the rule which admits ov when negativing a single word and not a sentence.
ADDITIONAL NOTES.
—_——>——_
P, 2.—Thumb points out (Zellen. 125) that Josephus has only been con- victed of one Hebraism, the use of προστίθεσθαι c. inf. =‘‘to go on to do” (5 non, t.e. “todo again’). (For this, cf Wellh. 28.) He refers to Schmidt Jos. 514-7, and Deissmann BS 67 n. That the solitary Hebraism in the Pales- tinian writer should be a lexical one, not a grammatical, is suggestive.
P. 7.—In the Expositor for September 1905, Prof. Ramsay says that the earlier tombs at Lystra show Latin inscriptions, while at Iconium Greek is normal. This may involve our substituting Latin as the language of Paul’s preaching at Lystra: such a conclusion would not in itself be at all surprising.
P. 8.—‘‘ Even a Palestinian like Justin knew no Hebrew,” says Dalman (Words 44) in arguing against Resch’s theory of a primitive Hebrew Gospel.
P. 10.—Lightfoot (on Gal 4°) prefers to regard ’ABBd ὁ πατήρ in Mk 14% as spoken by our Lord in this form. He cites from Schéttgen the address "v3 "Ὁ, in which the second element (κύριε) emphasises the first by repetition ; and he compares Rev 91! 12°20, Thus understood, the phrase would be a most emphatic ‘‘testimony to that fusion of Jew and Greek which prepared the way for the preaching of the Gospel to the heathen.” But Lightfoot’s first alternative (practically that of the text) seems on the whole more probable.
P. 16.—In Ac 2! D, Blass puts a full stop at the end of the verse. But we might translate without the stop:—‘‘It came to pass during those days of fulfilment of the day of Pentecost, while they were all gathered together, that lo! there was...” This is the (δ) form, with καὶ ἰδού, so that it comes near (a). This punctuation helps us to give adequate force to the durative infin. συμπληροῦσθαι. On this view D gives us one ex. of the (a2) form, and one of the (5), to reinforce the more or less doubtful ex. of (Ὁ) in the ordinary text of Ac 57, Those who accept Blass’s theory of Luke’s two editions might say that the author had not quite given up the (a) and (δ) constructions when he wrote his first draft of Ac: before sending the revised edition to Theophilus, he corrected what remained of these (like a modern writer going over his proofs to expunge ‘‘split infinitives”’), but overlooked 5’. I am not commending that view here; but I may suggest a systematic study of the grammar of the D text in Luke as a probably fruitful field for those who would contribute to the greatest of all textual problems in the NT.
P. 23.—We might have expected to find a specimen of Cretan in Tit 11; but if Epimenides the Cretan was really the author of this unflattering descrip- tion of his countrymen, he waited till he came to Athens, where (among other advantages for this composition) he could write del and disyllabic dpyal. Plato makes him reach Athens just before the Persian War.
P, 30.—It may be worth while to add a note illustrating the early date at which some characteristic MGr elements began to appear in the vernacular.
233
284 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
On a Galatian tombstone of vi/A.p.(BCH 1903, 335) the word ἀνάπαυσις is written dvdr >ayis, showing the fully developed result of the pronunciation of avas av: cf MGr ἔπαψα from παύω. Ramsay (C. and B. ii. 537) notes xarec- oxéBaca (BCH 1888, 202), which is an ex. of the same phenomenon. He also gives a Christian inscription of iii/aA.D. from Phrygia, containing the 3 pl. ἐπιτηδεύσουν, and ‘‘an anticipation of the modern periphrastic future” in βουληθῇ ἀνοίξι, noted by Mordtmann. We may add the gen. ἐσοῦ from ii/a.D., as OP 628. But Thumb (in BZ ix. 234) cites a yet earlier ex., ἔχουσες for nom. or acc. pl. fem., from an inscription of i/a.p.
Ρ, 43.—S. Langdon (4JP xxiv. 447 ff.) examines the history of ἐάν for ἄν, and agrees with Winer, who thinks it a peculiarity of the popular language (WM 390). Mr Langdon attributes it to ‘‘the effort to emphasise the abstract conditional aspect of the relative clause. This would of course occur much more frequently with relatives without antecedent than when they were defined by an antecedent. . . . This popular idiom met the necessity which the LXX translators felt in their effort to distinguish between the complete and in- complete relative clauses when translating from, Hebrew. . . . In the NT the rule of using ἐάν in sentences without antecedent is invariably followed, almost invariably in the OT and in Christian Greek writers.” Mr Langdon’s trust in his one or two exx. from classical MSS can hardly be shared ; and before we can feel sure that the LXX translators themselves used this ἐάν, and meant anything by the distinction, we should at least have examined the early papyri very carefully. The earliest exx. quotable, so far as I know, are BM 220 bis (188 B.c.) and G18 (132 B.c.): Tb P 12 δέ, 105, 107, are also from ii/p.c. A suggestive ex. is Tb P 59 (99 B.c.), where the sentence is translatable with either interpretation of ἐάν. It may be noted that the rarity of antecedent in these relative sentences makes it easy to misinterpret statistics.
Ρ, 44.--Ἐφιορκεῖν, banned by WH as ‘‘ Western,” occurs frequently in inscriptions and papyri. See Schwyzer Ferg. 118 for exx. and an explanation (Thumb’s). -
P. 55.—A more peculiar product is [ἐπικαλέομε (=-ar) in Audollent no. 189 (Rome), to which Prof. Thumb calls my attention. So καλέω δ. no. 15 (Syria, iii/a.p.). That these are genuine survivals of uncontracted forms (e.g. from Epic dialect) is very improbable,
P. 58.—‘‘ Pindaric Construction,” when the verb follows, is hardly ana- coluthic: it is due to ἃ mental grouping of the compound subject into one entity —‘‘ flesh and blood” =‘‘ humanity,” ‘‘ heaven and earth ’’=‘‘ the universe.” A papyrus ex. may be cited: BU 225 (ii/A.D.) ὑπάρχι δὲ αὐτῇ ἐν τῇ κώμῃ οἰκίαι δύο καὶ κτλ. So also 537.
Ρ. 60.—Meisterhans ® 203 (§ 84) cites a number of cxx. from Attic inscrip- tions of v/ and iv/B.c., where in a continued enumeration there is a relapse into the nominative. Gildersleeve adds ΟἿΑ 1. 170-173 (v/B.c. =Roberts- Gardner no. 97) τάδε παρέδοσαν. . . στέφανος. . . φιάλαι ete.
P. 63.—To discuss this large question for individual exx. would take us too long. Blass in § 39. 3 states the case fairly: he notes that the misuse of els was still a provincialism, which in respect of the Jocal signification of els and ἐν is not present in the Epistles nor (strangely enough) in Rev, though found in all the narrative writers of the NT. Hatzidakis 210 f. illustrates both the use of eis for ἐν and that of ἐν for els: for the latter, add the early Par P 10 ἀνακεχώρηκεν ἐν ᾿Αλεξανδρείᾳ. (He should not have cited 2 Tim 1", where els is perfectly normal.) We need not accept all Blass’s exx.: thus Jn 17% is surely ‘‘ perfected into one.” But it must be confessed that our evidence now
ADDITIONAL NOTES. 235
makes it impossible to sce in Jn 118 (ὁ ὧν εἰς τὸν κόλπον) ‘the combination . . . of rest and motion, of a continuous relation with a realisation of it’’ (Westcott). Without further remark we will reserve discussion till the time comes for treating the prepositions systematically, only noting that in D there are suggestive substitutions of ἐν for els in Ac 713 8° (the latter however probably involving an entirely different sense—see p. 71), and εἰς fur ἐν in Ac 11% (ἐστὶν els Τάρσον). On this cf Wellh. 12.
P. 65.—D often, as Wellhausen notes (p. 13), shows acc. with ἀκούειν, κατηγορεῖν, and κρατεῖν, where the other texts have gen.
P. 67.—Both in Ac 16% and in 188, D alters the dat. to ἐπί (els) c. acc. ; but in the latter a clause is added containing πιστεύειν τῷ θεῷ.
P. 69.—It should have been noted on p. 49 that Blass’s objection to recog- nising the noun ’EAawy, in Ac 113 and Josephus, rests upon the fact that assimi- lation of case is generally practised, and that in τὸ ὄρος τῶν ἐλαιῶν the genitive is unmistakable. But the nom., though rare, has parallels: see Deissmann BS 210. Blass rightly, I think, regards Jn 13” as a vocative, and not as equivalent to φωνεῖτέ με τὸν διδάσκαλον ; but Winer’s 1 Sam 9° is a clear ex. to put by Rev 9” and Blass’s own Mk 316 (as found in A and the Latt.). It is note- worthy that both Luke and Josephus (Ané. xx. 8. 6 πρὸς ὄρος τὸ προσαγορευό- μενον ᾽'Ἔλαιων, Bell. Jud. ii. 18. 5 εἰς τὸ ᾿Ελαιων καλούμενον ὄρος) not only use the unambiguous genitive -ὥνος (Ant. vii. 9. 2 διὰ τοῦ ᾿Ελαιῶνος ὄρους) but also put the anarthrous ἐλαίὼν in combination with the word called. This seems to show that the name was not yet fixed in the Greek speech of Jerusalem residents, and that the halfway-house to the full proper name wanted some apology. Td ὄρος τῶν ἐλαιῶν will thus be a translation of the native name. The new name for the hill would spring from two sources, the vernacular word for oliveyard, and the impulse to decline the stereotyped ἐλαιῶν. An exact parallel for the latter was quoted in KHzapos. vi. vii. 111. In the Ptolemaic papyri Tb P 62, 64, 82, 98 the noun ἰβίων is found, which the editors connect closely with ἰβίων (τροφῆς) ‘‘ for the feeding of ibises,” the word being treated as nom. sing. instead of gen. pl.: they observe that ‘‘the declension of the village called βίων probably contributed to the use of this curious form.” In both words then we see a gen. pl. made into a new nominative which coincides with a noun of slightly different meaning already existing.
P. 70.—Prof. Thumb tells me that the construction (parenthetic nomina- tive) survives in MGr: thus (ἀπ᾿) ἐδὼ καὶ πέντε μέρες [nom.]=‘‘ heute vor 5 Tagen.” E. W. Hopkins (AJP xxiv. 1) cites a rare use from Skt. : ‘a year (nom.) almost, I have not gone out from the hermitage.”’ Contra, Wellh. 29.
Jb.—Eixéves perhaps should be translated: it is the name given in one of the latest issucd papyri in BU iv. to the personal descriptions which accompany an IOU, receipt, bill of sale, census paper, etc.
Ib.—The vocative ἡ παῖς, as Dr Rendel Harris reminds me, literally trans- lates the Aramaic absolute xp’oy (as Dalman gives it, Gramm. 118 ἢ). I should have remarked that the usage is commonest where there is translation from Semitic. The author of Heb does not use it except in OT citations, nor does Luke in Ac 13-28 (though we may note that in the three citations involved there is no article in the Hebrew). It is only another instance of over-use of an idiom through its coincidence with a native usage.
P. 74.—See Kiihner-Gerth 401 η.ὅ 6, for these genitives after a negative adjective. Typical exx. are Tb P 1065 (ii/B.c.) al, ἀκίνδυνος παντὸς κινδύνου, ἀνυπόλογον πάσης φθορᾶς, and ἀνυπεύθυνοι παντὸς ἐπιτίμου. Tb P 124 (ii/s.c.) ἀδιστάστους ὄντας πάσης αἰτίας. BU 970 (11(4.}.) τῆς εἰς ἅπαντας εὐεργεσίας. ..
236 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
ἀβοήθητος. They illustrate ἄνομος θεοῦ in 1 Co 97! = ἄνευ νόμου θεοῦ, which differs only in that the genitive is subjective, while the rest are either objective genitives or pure ablatives,
Jo.—One or two parallels may. be added for the free use of the gen. abs. For the substitution of gen. for the case in construction, ef Tb P 41 (ii/B.c.), ἱκανῶν ἡμῶν ὑπόπτως ἐχόντων ἀνακεχωρήκαμεν ; BU 1040 (ii/aA.p.) χαίρω ὅτι μοι ταῦτα ἐποίησας, ἐμοῦ μεταμελομένον περὶ μηδενός. Other exx. will be seen in CR xv. 487. For gen. abs. without expressed subjects, cf BU 925 (iii/a.p. %) ἀναγνωσθέντων, 970 (ii/A.D.) δηλωθέντος δι’ ἧς προείθη μοι ἀσφαλείας, etc.
P. 78.-—Elative comparatives may be seen in D in Ac 415, φανερότερόν (sic) ἐστιν, and 10% βέλτιον ἐφίστασθε (= éx.—cf p. 44, and WH App. 144). It substitutes πλεῖστοι for πλείους in 19%, and adds an elative ἥδιστα in 13°. On 107 Blass compares 24 251° in the ordinary text, and 2 Tim 118, Jn 137. As to χείρων, we should add that χειρίστην is found in Tb P 72 (ii/B.0.).
P. 79.—Before leaving the subject of comparison, we ought to remark on curious forms which have been brought into existence by the weakening of the old formations, or their detachment from the categories of comparative and superlative. Beside the regular form ἐλάχιστος, which is predominantly super- lative in Mt, but elative in Lk (éer, and 12% doubtful) and Jas, Paul uses ἐλα- xtorérepos in Eph 3°, whether as comparative or true superlative the sentence leaves uncertain. He uses ἐλάχιστος as superl. in 1 Co 15°, and as elative in 4° 67, The double comparative μειζότερος occurs in 3 Jn *: cf our lesser, which is equally due to the absence of clear comparative form in a word whose meaning is clear. See Jannaris HG 147 for a list of these forms: add pectorepos, Archiv iii, 173 (iv/A.D.) al, μεγιστότατος BM 130 (i/ii a.D.), πρεσβυτερωτέρα BM 177 (i/aA.D.), πρώτιστα BU 665 (i/A.p.). Exx. are found even in older Greek.
On the Aramaising use of positive 6. 7 or παρά for compar., see Wellh. 28.
P. 81.—Wellhausen (p. 26) finds in the Synoptists some traces of insertion of the article through literal translation of Semitic idiom: here again D is con- spicuous. Thus Mt 10” τοῦ ἀσσαρίον. Note also his exx. of Semitism arising from the rule which drops the article with a noun in construct state preceding a definite noun: so Mt 12® ‘‘ the Queen of the South.”
P. 82.—Westcott translates ἐν συναγωγῇ (Jn 6 18”) ‘* in time of solemn assembly.” Our own use of ‘‘in church,” ‘‘in or out of school,” etc., is enough to illustrate this phrase, which must be explained on the lines described in the text above: Westcott seems to be somewhat overpressing it.
P. 84.—On the presence or absence of the article when a prepositional clause has to be added as an epithet, cf J. A. Robinson, Ephes. 149. For its presence may be cited such passages as Eph 1%, for its omission, Eph 2" 4}, Phil 15, Col. 14: 8,
Itis only very seldom that we find in Greek of tho NT types the complex arrangement by which the classical language will wrap up awhole series of ad- juncts between the article and its noun. i Pet 88 will serve as an exceptionally good example. The simplicity of NT style naturally causes less involved forms to be generally preferred.
One more paralipomenon under the Article may be brought in. InG. A. Cooke’s North Semitic Inscriptions, no. 110 (ii/A.p.), there is a bilingual inscription, Palmyrene-Aramaic and Greek, containing within its compass a good parallel to the genealogy in Lk 33°; ’Aa:Adwew Alpdvov τοῦ Μοκίμου τοῦ Alpdvov τοῦ Μαθθᾶ (Wadd. 2586). There are one or two other specimens: in 118 the article is dropped for the last two steps, as in the first step in 110.
P. 85.--In Mt 6!” note that D reads ἄλειψον, rejecting the middle in view of
ADDITIONAL NOTES, 237
the presence of cov. In Ac 57 ἔθετο and 31 συγκαλεσάμενοι, D makes the opposite change, which in the former case, at any rate, is no improvement.
P. 88.—Cf Wellh. 30: “ἴδιος in Mt and Lk is sometimes 3rd pers. possessive.”
P. 89.—Prof. Thumb notes how accené may differentiate words capable of full or attenuated meaning: ‘‘ God és,” but ‘‘ God is Almighty.”
P. 94.—To the exx. cited from Blass (top of p. 95) add from Hawkins Jn 15 (taken like Lk 816 from the original source in Mk 17), Ac 15!” (LXX), Rev 38 72-9 138- 12 908 and 1 Pet 2% (Ti with x* LP, against ABCK). The idiom is in one place translation Greek, and in the rest a sign of inferior Greek culture, which makes it the more striking that Lk and Jn (not Mt) faithfully copy their source. Since the Greek of 1 Pet is remarkably good, it does not seem likely that οὗ τῷ μώλωπι αὐτοῦ is due to the autograph: the LXX αὐτοῦ may well have been added by a glossator who did not notice that the ov made it needleas. This consideration may fairly be set against the ὦ priori argument of Ti in favour of the reading of δὲ. See p. 249.
P. 96.—Cf Josephus Ant. i. 1.1, αὕτη μὲν ἄν εἴη πρώτη ἡμέρα, Μωυσῆς δ᾽ αὐτὴν μίαν εἶπε (quoted by Schmidt). Note in Gen 813 the variation μηνὸς τοῦ πρώτου, μιᾷ τοῦ μηνός, which had adequate motive in the different words of the Hebrew. Prof. Thumb has traced the history of the Greek names for the days of the week in Zeitschrift fiir deutsche Wortforschung i. 163-178 (1901).
P. 102.—The importance of Heb 13” in critical questions justifies our adding one more note on dd. In Theol. Rumndschau vy. 64 Deissmann writes two ‘* marginalia”” upon Harnack’s famous articlein ZNTW i. 16 ff. He notes the masculine διηγούμενον in 1183. ποῦ, I presume, as a difficulty likely to give Harnack much trouble; and observes that οἱ ἀπὸ Ἰταλίας ‘‘can, according to the late Greek use of ἀπό, describe very easily the greetings of the brethren to be found in Italy.” He refers to the article by Εἰ. Brose in Theol. Stud. und Krit., 1898, pp. 351-860, on ἀπό in 1 Co 11%. Brose examines ἀπό, παρά, ὑπό, and ἐκ, showing that in daily speech these prepositions were used without exact- ness of distinction. The argument is designed to show that ἀπὸ τοῦ Κυρίου in 1 Co Z.c. does not mean by tradition, but by revelation from the Lord. Deiss- mann observes that Brése could have made his treatment of ἀπό still more illuminating, if he had gone outside the NT: he refers to a ‘‘stop-gap ” of his own in Hermes xxxiii. 844, which touches on the passage from Heb.
P. 105—On ὑπέρ we may cite a good parallel for Rom 12°, TP 8 (ii/s.c.) ὑπὲρ ἑαντὸν φρονῶν.
P. 112.----Α very good ex. in Greek is 2 Co 48, where perfective ἐξ shows the ἀπορία in its final result of despair.
P. 116.—In the Dream of Nectonebus, the last Egyptian king of the old dynasties (LPw, ii/p.c.), there occurs the phrase διατετήρηκα τὴν χώραν ἀμέμπτως, which gives a striking parallel to 2 Tim 4’. The perfective in the king’s words emphasises the fact that the country is safe, the watchful care has been successful ; the simplex in Paul mys the stress on the speaker’s own action, ‘‘I have guarded my trust.”
P. 118.—Hawkins, HS 142, gives the number of compound verbs for the several parts of the NT. His figures work out thus:—Heb has 7.8 per WH page, Ac 6°4, Lk 6°0, Mk 5°7, Paul 8.8, Mt 3°6, Cath. Epp. and Rev 81, and Jn 21. The high figure of Mk in this table is rather surprising. That Heb and Luke (whose unity comes out by this, as by so many other tests) should be at the top, is what we might expect.
P. 126.—Since writing this, I have noticed Prof. Ramsay’s suggestive
238 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
language on the early Christians of the average type in C. and B. ii. 485: see also his Paul 208 f.
Pp. 126 and 129.—On the biblical use of present and aorist imperative, cf F. W. Mozley inJ7'S iv. 279 ff. Prof. Thumb notes that Mozley independently confirms his judgement on the aoristic προσέφερεν in Heb 1117, by the observa- tion that φέρε and dye are aoristic in meaning. Were the author Mark or the John of Rev, and the context less clamant for an imperfect, I should readily yield.
P. 182.—See now D. Smith, Jn the Days of His Flesh, p. 208.
i6.—In OGIS 219 (iii/B.c.) there is an ex. of coincident ἀσπασάμενοι which may be worth quoting :----ἐλέσθαι δὲ καὶ πρεσβευτὰς. . . [oirives] ἀσπασάμενοι αὐτὸν παρὰ τίοῦ δήμου πρῶτον μὲν κελεύσουσιν ὑγιαίνειν. . . [ἔπειτα δ᾽ ἀπαγγε- λοῦσιν αὐτῶι τὴν τιμήν. The ‘‘salutation” seems to consist in the double message : it is difficult anyhow to make it precede the wish for good health.
P. 148.—In Mt 25% we find ὁ εἰληφώς in a phrase otherwise parallel with v.” ὁλαβών. The intervening space supplies an excuse for the change which takes it out of the category described in the paragraph above.’ Both tenses were entirely justifiable, and the rather more emphatic perfect suits the situation of v.~ better.
P. 145.—I must make it clear that in this tentative account of fexnxa—which is propounded with great hesitation, and with a full appreciation of its diffi- culties—there is no suggestion that the aoristic meaning proposed was more than an idiosyncrasy of individual writers, or (better) of certain localities. The pure perfect force is found long after Paul’s day: thus in the formula of an IOU, ὁμολογῶ ἐσχηκέναι παρὰ σοῦ διὰ χειρὸς ἐξ οἴκον χρῆσιν ἔντοκον (BU 1015— early 111,4.}.}, ‘‘to have received and still possess.” But in AP 80 (ii/B.c.), προσεμαρτύρουν τὸν M. κατεσχηκέναι τὸν οἰκίαν πρὸ τοῦ πολέμου, the aoristic possessed seems to be recognisable, in an early illiterate document.
P. 146.---Οἶμαι δὲ κἂν Λαμπιδώ, τὴν Λεωτυχίδου μὲν θυγατέρα, ᾿Αρχιδάμον δὲ γυναῖκα, “Aydos δὲ μητέρα, οἵ πάντες βασιλεῖς γεγόνασι, θαυμάσαι ἂν κτλ. It is hard to see why this should be cited as aoristic: Agis was on the throne at the supposed time of the dialogue.
P. 148.—In connexion with this paragraph should be mentioned the birth of the new present στήκω (MGr στέκω) from the perfect ἔστηκα, with the same meaning.
P. 152.—On this view of the prehistoric relations of act. and mid., cf Hirt, Indog. Forsch. xvii. 70. The theory had been restated in terms of the new school of philology, in Osthoff and Brugmann’s pioneer Morphologische Untersuchungen iv. 282 n. (1881). There H. Osthoff conjectures that ‘‘ Skt. dvég-ti and dvis-té depend on one and the same proethnic basis-form [dweistat], which was differentiated by the accent, according as one wished to say ‘hdtes for himself’ or ‘hates for himséif.’” I had overlooked this passage, and am all the more confirmed by it in the theory which I had independently developed as to the relationship of the voices in the element they severally emphasise.
On the late Greek developments of the voices the student should carefully observe the rich material in Hatzidakis 198 ff.
P. 156.—The proverb in 2 Pet 2” is acutely treated by Dr Rendel Harris, as I ought to have remembered, in The Story of Ahikar, p. lxvii. He cites as the probable original words appearing in some texts of Ahikar: ‘‘ My son, thou hast behaved like the swine which went to the bath with people of quality, and when he came out, saw a stinking drain, and went and rolled himself in it.”
ADDITIONAL NOTES. 239
If, as seems extremely likely, this is the source of the παροιμία to which 2 Pet refers, of course λουσαμένη is used in its correct sense, and the possibility of a Greek iambic verse being the medium of its transmission is all that remains of my note on the passage. I leave it unaltered in view of the measure of un- certainty attaching in Dr Harris’s judgement to the account he proposes.
P. 166.—Mr P. Giles, in a letter endorsing and improving my Scotch trans- lation of Homer 12. i. 187, says, ‘‘I agree that ἄν is very like jist, and if you had added Zike at the end you would have got your subjunctive also. This like does for many dialects what the subjunctive did for Greek, putting a state- ment in a polite, inoffensive way asserting only verisimilitude.” It is found elsewhere. .
P. 168.—Add to this list the curious anti-Christian inscription in Ramsay, C. and B. ii. 477 (no. 348) οὗτος ὁ βίος μοι γέγονεν (aoristic!) ὅταν ἔξων ἐγώ.
P. 169.—Since writing the paragraph on el μήτι dv, I have observed several other exx. of εἰ. . . ἄν in illiterate Greek of a century or two later than the NT. An inscription from Cyzicus, lately published by Mr F. W. Hasluck in JHS xxv. 68, has ἵ τις δ᾽ dy τολμήσι, μετέλθῃ αὐτὸν ὁ Θεός. (The second subjunctive here is the itacistic equivalent of the optative which would have been used in earlier Greek: cf p. 199n.). In Ramsay's C. and B. vol. ii. I note the following :—No. 210 (p. 380) ef δέ res ὧν φανείη. .. ἔσται. .., where the optative shows the writer a bit of an Atticist, but not very successful. No. 377 (p. 580) κατεσκεύασεν τὸ ἡρῷον ἑαυτῇ καὶ τῷ ἀνδρὶ αὐτῆς Evrixy καὶ ef τινι ἂν ζῶσα συνχωρήσει" εἰ δὲ μετὰ τὴν τελευτήν μον ἐάν τις ἐπιχιρήσει κτλ. No. 278 (p. 894) εἰ δὲ [ἕτερος] ἂν ἐπιχειρήσει, θή]σει κτλ. I have not had time to search throughout, but I suspect there are many other exx.
P. 170.—On μή in questions see J. E. Harry, Gildersieeve Studies, 480. He shows it was absent from orators and historians, and from the later writers Aristotle, Polybius, and Diodorus. Plato uses it 24 times; but the 69 occur- rences in NT outnumber those in all the prose and poetry of ten previous centuries. The inference is that it was a feature of everyday language. In nearly half the exx. the verb is be, can, or have ; three-fourths of the total comes from Jn and Paul (only Rom and Co).
P. 171.—For ἐκτὸς εἰ μή see Deissmann, BS 118. Cf also Ramsay, C. and B. ii. 891 (no. 254) χωρὶς ef μή τι πάθῃ.
Jb.—On the encroachments of μή, especially as to ὅτι μή and wc. inf. after verba dicendi et cogitandi, see E. L. Green in Gildersleeve Studies, 471 ff. Green shows how μή intrudes increasingly in the Kou literature. Considering the extent of this intrusion in the time of the NT, there are fewer exx. of μή wrongly used than would be expected, except that μή holds almost undisputed sway over the participle. There are 6 exx. of μή ὁ. inf. after a verb of saying or denying [Lk 22% must however be struck off (WH, following NBLT)]; 2 with verbs of thinking (2 Co 115, Ac 255) ; one case of causal ὅτι μή, Jn 338; 3 of μή after relatives. (In excluding Col 218 because an imper. precedes, Green ignores a yet more decisive reason—that μή is indisputably spurious.) The participle with μή in orat. obi. occurs only in Ac 23” 28°; in causal, concessive, and temporal clauses it abounds. The comparison of Plutarch with the NT shows a great advance in the use of ὅτι 44. The whole paper deserves study.
A few papyrus passages may be cited in illustration of the subjects of Green’s paper. For μή in relative clauses:—BU 114 (ii/A.p.) προοῖκα ἣν ἀποδέδωκεν αὐτῷ μήτε δύναται λαβεῖν, CPR 19 (iv/a.D.) ἐντάξας. . . A μὴ συνεφώνησα. For verba dic. et cog.:—MP 26 (iii/B.c.) μὴ ὀφείλειν ὁμόσας μοι, BM 401 (ii/B.c.} κατεγνωκὼς μὴ δύνασθαι, OP 266 (i/A.D.) ὁμολογεῖ μὴ ἐνκαλεῖν (classical, as ὁμ. =
240 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
undertakes), OP 237 (ii/a.p.) ἀπεκρείνατο μὴ c. inf., and several cases with δηλοῦν (BU 5, 11, etc.). For ἐπεὶ μή cf BU 530 (i/a. D.) μέμφεταί σε ἐπὶ μὴ ἀντέγραψας αὐτῇ (the charge, like the ex. in Jn J.c.).
On εἰ od Blass notes (Hermes xxiv. 312) its identity with ἂμ μή in the illiterate OP 119 (see p. 28).
A note may be added on μὴ ὅτι ; for though the NT only uses οὐχ ὅτι, the syntax is identical with that in μήτιγε, 1 Co 68 (‘not to speak of mere affairs of daily life”). It occurs in BM 42 (ii/B.c.) μὴ ὅτι ye τοσούτον χρόνου ἐπιγεγο- νότος, ‘‘not to speak of so much time having gone by.”
P. 177.—In Mt 6” Ὁ reads μὴ θησαυρίσεται (= -- ε), which may just possibly be added to the list. But itis more likely to be a mere mistake. An earlier ex. of μή c. fut. than those cited in the text is Par P 15 (ii/B.c.) μὴ γοῦν καὶ Kparjoecs—but this may be aor. subj.
P. 181.—Essentially the same principle must be traced in ἵλεώς σοι (Mt 167), ‘*[God be] merciful to thee.” The interjectional adjective and participle are on the same footing, and must be explained in the same way. In CR xv. 436 are quoted inscriptional parallels for this phrase (Gen 43%, 2 Sam 20”, 1 Chr 1119): —Letronne 221 (iv/A.D.) ἵλεως ἡμῖν Πλάτων καὶ ἐνταῦθα, and without subject 557 ἵλεώς σοι, Ἑρμείας. . . καὶ Ἡράκλειος ἀδελφός. Letronne also quotes another inscription (ii. 286) ἵλεώς σοι ἀλυπί (leg. ᾿Αλύπι), ‘‘[Sarapis] help thee, Alypius,” as I read it. With the development of a deprecatory force in such phrases we may compare that in our vernacular expression, ‘‘ Mercy on us!”
P. 182.—Dr Rendel Harris thinks the ὑμεῖς may be only translation Greek. The suggested allusion to Paul is in any case only propounded tentatively. It is curious that ἀρξάμενος gives us trouble elsewhere in Luke. Ac 10* is fairly hopeless as it stands, and Blass thinks dpt. ἀπὸ τ. I’. interpolated from Lk 285, It is conceivable that ἀρξάμενος γάρ in AD vg may preserve the relics of a better text, in which a new sentence beginning there was continued with ᾿Ιησοῦς ὁ ἀπὸ N., ὃν (Ὁ) ἔχρισεν . . ., οὗτος (Ὠ). The change needed to make the D reading grammatical is but small. (See now Wellh. 12.)
P. 185.—The practically complete equivalence of subjunctive and future is quite as evident in Phrygian inscriptions as in the Alexandrian Greek Bible or late Egyptian papyri. Thus we have in JHS xxiii. 85 ef δέ τις ἀνύξας ἕτερον βάλῃ; and in Ramsay C. and B. ii. 392 (no. 260) ef τινα ἄλλον βουληθῇ, 559 (no. 445, iii/a.D.) ef τις δὲ ἕτερος ἐπισενένκει (so nos. 448, 449). In nos. 317, 391, 395, 399 al (pp. 472, 585-8) we have οὐ τεθῇ for the οὐ τεθήσεται found elsewhere. The progressive disappearance of the Future prepares us for MGr, where the tense is a periphrastic one. For the papyri, cf BU 303 (vi/a.p.) παράσχω ‘*T will furnish,” AP 144 (v/A.p.) ἔλθω “1 will come.” Innumerable exx. of verbs in -ce and the like, after ὃς ἄν and other forms requiring sub- junctives, could be cited from various sources; but these being itacistic prove less—see Ὁ. 35.
Ρ, 194.—Prof. Thumb tells me that MGr μὴ γένοιτο seems to him a phrase of learned origin. (I notice that Pallis retains it in Lk 201%) See Ὁ. 249,
P. 199 n. 2.—Prof. Thumb observes that he does not believe in itacism as contributory to the obsolescence of the optative, ‘‘since the coincidence of oc and y took place very late.” It has been made clear in the text that the optative was doomed from the very birth of the Κοινή, while οἱ (and v) did not become simple ζ for several centuries.
P. 208.—By way of adding to our illustrations from the Bezan text of Ac, we may note that in 12!7 D substitutes ἵνα σιγί . . . Jow for σιγᾶν, and in 1618 ἵνα ἐξέλθῃς for ἐξελθεῖν, both after words of commanding. In 175: however the
ADDITIONAL NOTES. 241
omission of ἐν ἢ" μέλλει adds to the tale of quasi-final infinitives. Were this tendency to use ἵνα more marked, it might help us to fix the provenance of D, by the use of Thumb’s canon (p. 205).
P, 216.—Some further exx. are noted by Votaw (p. 18) from the LXX. He gives on p. 19 the totals for the articular infin. in OT, Apocrypha, and NT: there are 1161 occurrences with a preposition, and 1614 without. The anar- throus infin. occurs 6190 times in all. In the statistics of the articular infin. I have checked my count (based on MG) by Votaw’s: they differ slightly where I have omitted passages which WH enclose in double brackets, and also through my not counting twice the places where two infinitives stand under the government of a single article. Votaw’s total for Heb has a slight error.
P. 224.—To the footnote it should be added that Hirt and Sommer make sequimint imperative the original form, supposing it simply transferred to the indicative at a later stage (Indog. Forsch. xvii. 64),
Ῥ, 230.—The phrase in Mt 13? is quoted here purely as it stands in Greek ; exx, of this participle could be cited from almost any page of narrative in the NT or other Greek writing. It happens however, as Dr Rendel Harris tells me, that my example is a translation of a phrase meaning simply ‘‘he went on board a boat.” He observes, ‘‘‘To go up and sit in a ship’ is a pure Syriac expression. Sometimes you get ‘sit in the sea’ for ‘embark’” (Mk 4}, the original here). This superfluous καθῆσθαι is rather like the pleonasms quoted from Dalman on pp. 14 ff. Of course the recognition of this as translation Greek does not affect the grammatical category in which we place ἐμβάντα.
Since I have not given a chapter to Conjunctions, I may put at the end of these addenda a note upon a use of ἀλλά which has excited much discussion. In Mt 2038 some have translated ἀλλά ‘‘ except,” as if=el μή or πλήν. Against this both Winer and his editor (p. 566) speak very decisively : thus, the latter says, ‘‘ Even in Mk 4” ἀλλά is simply διέ (but rather), not save, except.” I have a draft letter of his to a fellow-Reviser (dated 1871), in which he argues at length against the lax use of ἀλλά, which in Mtd.c. ‘‘ would be equivalent to supplying ἐμόν ἐστι δοῦναι in the second clause.” Blass does not allude to the latter passage, but on ΜῈ 1.6. (p. 269) he says ἀλλ᾽ ΞΞ εἰ μή “save that.” It is certainly difficult. here to separate the ἀλλά from the ἐὰν μή which stands in the parallel clause. 1 am very unwilling to challenge an opinion held so strongly after careful study; but the discovery of Tb P 104 (i/B.c.) makes me ready to believe that the note in WM might have been altered under stress of new evidence. Καὶ μὴ ἐξέστω Φιλίσκωι γυναῖκα ἄλλην ἐπαγαγέσθαι ἀλλὰ ᾿Απολλωνίαν must call for a sense οὗ ἀλλά very near to εἰ μή. That supplements may be contrived we may allow, though they are often far from simple; but is there adequate motive for straining the natural meaning of the phrase? In Gen 21% οὐδὲ ἐγὼ ἤκουσα ἀλλὰ σήμερον, the ἀλλά actually translates ‘aba, except. In Mt d.c., it may well be that the AV or RV supplement is correct. But I cannot feel at all sure of this ; and it seems moreover that the meaning need not be affected by reading ἀλλά as=el μή. In Jn 15%, Lk 4%, Ac 273, Rey 2157, etc., we are familiar with the brachylogy which makes εἰ μή and the like=bué only: why not apply this to ἀλλά ξ This would mean that only the thought of δοῦναι was carried on, and not that of ἐμόν as well. (Cf now Wellh. 24 in support of my position.) .
The study of Wellhausen’s illuminating forty pages increases my regret that I can only refer to them generally in notes inserted at the last revision. My argument in chapter i. is not affected by Wellhausen’s exposition ; but had his
16
242 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
book come into my hands earlier, I should have taken care to emphasise more clearly what is said above concerning ‘‘ translation Greek,” and the tendency to over-use a correct vernacular idiom where it exactly or nearly translates an Aramaic original. Wellhausen rightly warns us against denying Aramaism because we can scrape together one or two parallels from holes and corners of Greek writing. That was the error of the old Purists, and we must be on our guard. But if we neo-Hellenists need to be careful, Wellhausen’s criticisms of Dalman show that the neo-Semitists want watching as well. Itis necessary in studying Wellhausen to remember that he only professes to speak from the Semitist’s side: his φραγγελοῦν (bis) on p. 10 and ἑαυτός and ἀλλήλοι on p. 30 illustrate his limitation—ncen omnia possumus omnes! Space forbids our mentioning more than one further feature of his work, the great importance of his treatment of the Bezan text. He shows that D in a large number of places stands distinctly nearer the Aramaic which underlies the Synoptic records. If this is proved, we have manifestly taken a large step towards the solution of our great textual question. Let me finally quote his dictum that Mk is tolerably free from Hebraisms, ἴ.6. pieces of translation Greek due to the LXX: Mk is however richest in Aramaisms, which Mt and Lk have largely pruned away. Of course Wellhausen’s argument has no bearing on free Greek in the NT.
ADDITIONAL NOTES TO THE SECOND EDITION.
-.--ὄ ςς..
Ρ, 3.—To anticipate a possible objection, I may say that the evidence for large Jewish settlements in Egypt from an early date is indisputable: see for example Mahaffy’s and Th. Reinach’s contributions to Mélanges Nicole (pp. 619 ff., 451 ff.). Mahaffy speaks of Aramaic trade documents in Upper Egypt from the time of Xerxes down. So far, however, no ‘‘Hebraist’” has tried to use this fact to discount the deductions of Deissmann from the papyri ; and I need not meet the argument before it arises.
Ib.—The Rev. J. Pulliblank sends me an interesting extract from his notes of Bishop Lightfoot’s lectures in 1863. Speaking of some NT word which had its only classical authority in Herodotus, he said, ‘‘ You are not to suppose that the word had fallen out of use in the interval, only that it had not been used in the books which remain to us: probably it had been part of the common speech all along. I will go further, and say that if we could only recover letters that ordinary people wrote to each other without any thought of being literary, we should have the greatest possible help for the understanding of the language of the NT generally.”
P. 5.—A very striking testimony may be cited from Cicero, Pro Archia, 23 :—Nam si quis minorem gloriae fructum putat ex Graecis versibus percipi quam ex Latinis, vehementer errat, propterea quod Graeca leguntur in omnibus fere gentibus, Latina suis finibus, exiguis sane, continentur.
Ρ, 14.—To the exx. of els ἀπάντησιν c. gen. may be added two (one of them els ouvavr.) from the Pelagia stories (Leyenden der hi. Pelagia, ed. Usener), pp. 19, 22. The documents are written in excellent vernacular, which does not seem open to the charge of being merely modelled on the biblical Greek.
ADDITIONAL NOTES TO THE SECOND EDITION. 248
P. 19.—Dr Marcus Dods finds a weak spot in my parallel, in that Greek was generally ‘‘not the vernacular, but a second language acquired for com- mercial or social purposes. The real parallel would therefore be the English- speaking Hindu, or semi-Americanised German or Pole, or the pidgin-English- speaking Chinaman, or bilingual Highlander or Welshman.” But I think my statement in the text will stand. The Hindu and the Welshman, ‘‘ granted a tolerable primary education” in English, will not show much difference in their written dialect.
P. 22.—A reviewer in the Athenaeum, to whom I am greatly indebted, criticises my attitude towards the translation of Pallis. (So far from ‘‘ strongly objecting,” Mr Pallis prefers to be so styled, and not as Palli.) I cannot go into detail, but I would make two or three notes. (1) The Reviewer expresses the ‘‘shock” which even a foreigner experiences in finding Christ’s speeches ‘‘abounding in Turkish words.” Mr Pallis gives me a list of all the foreign words in his version of Mt, some two dozen in all, and not a quarter of them Turkish. This accusation of bringing in foreign words has been freely made by many on mere hearsay. (2) A lover of Hellenism can feel nothing but sympathy for the modern Greeks’ national pride in their language. But whether Greek artisans can repeat the NT Greek by heart or no, it is abundantly proved that they cannot wnderstand it; and that is sufficient justification for a popular version. (8) The general question of the Purist movement tempts discussion ; but it has only one side which is relevant for this book. If the movement only concerned the abolition of foreign words, the NT grammarian could quote Purist as readily as popular Greek. But the καθαρεύουσα is an artificial language in its grammar, and it is therefore obviously useless when we are seeking scientific evidence bearing on ancient Hellenistic. The strongest sympathiser with Purism as a national movement would have to admit that for such purposes as ours the faintest suspicion of artificiality makes MGr valueless: nothing but the unschooled speech of the people can help us here.
P. 28.—On the use of the term Kow Prof. Thumb observes that the grammarians were far from consistent with themselves. A definition like κοινὴ διάλεκτος 7 πάντες χρώμεθα is not far from our present use ; and even if the term be historically incorrect it is a pity to banish from science so well-established and pregnant a word (Neue Jahrbiicher 7. d. klass, Altertum, 1906, p. 262).
P. 32.—Dr W. H. Ὁ. Rouse, who has an exceptionally intimate first-hand knowledge of modern Greece, especially in the more out-of-the-way parts, tells me he thinks it too sweeping an assertion to say that the old dialects died out com- pletely, except for what they contributed to the Κοινή. He has heard the broad ἃ in Calymnos, and καὶ πόκα in Cos. In the lecture just quoted (Neue Jahrb. 1906, p. 256), Prof. Thumb gives some interesting survivals of old dialectic forms in Cyprus, which he has noticed in the curse-tablets of Audollent. We have in fact to remember that the dialects existing within the Koc»? were partly or even mainly characterised by the survivals from the old local dialect which the levelling process failed to destroy.
P. 34.—A good illustration of my point that dialectic differences very largely lay in pronunciation is found in Dr Rouse’s remark that ‘‘ a [modern] Athenian, 4 Lesbian and an Astypaliote all will write καί, while they pronounce it respect- ively kyé, dé, tsé.”
P, 36.—The case of τέσσαρες acc. ought not to be left without remarking that this is isolated, as the only early cardinal] which ever had a separate acc. form. In the first 900 of Wilcken’s ostraka I find 42 exx. of the indeclinable, and 29 of τέσσαρας, which shows how this form predominated in business
244 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
language before 200 a.p. I might add here (with reference to p. 46) that in the same documents I find τέσσερας and τεσσεράκοντα only once each (both ii/a.p.).
1b.—A ‘‘ probably Ptolemaic” ostrakon in Mélanges Nicole, p. 185 (E. J. Goodspeed), has φιλανθροπίᾳ and δόσις to illustrate further the early confusion of o and w: κατὰ μῆναν (see p. 49) and μηδενὶ Sots (p. 55 n.*) evidence the writer’s scanty culture. Earlier still is λογευώντων HbP (249 B.c.).
P. 38.—The point about κόρη needs perhaps to be stated less concisely. Brugmann makes it probable that in early Attic, as in its sister dialect Ionic, ἃ became ἢ universally, but that in Attic cn and py (ὑγιῆ, πρήττω) broadened into i, pa, whenever the ἡ did not arise from a pre-Greek @ But this specially Attic power of p became obsolete while κόρη was still pronounced with digamma,
P. 41.—Thumb (op. cit. 260) holds out hopes that we may get some not inconsiderable help in dating and localising textual types from such peculiarities as the confusion of tenuis, aspirata and media in Egypt and Further Asia, and that of ὁ and 7 sounds in Asia Minor and Syria.
P. 44.—Among the irregular aspirations might have been given οὐχ ᾿Ιουδαϊκῶς (Gal 214 x*ACP 17 87). Here the οὐχί of BD* al probably helps us; a repetition of the « after οὐκ would lead to the correction οὐχί and this to οὐχ by the dropping of the same letter. This seems simpler than Lightfoot’s explanation from the Hebrew initial δ δ".
P. 48.—Usener, Pelagia, p. 50, quotes ἡ Ἱεροσόλυμα from two MSS of xi/A.D. In the same book we find the vocative κύρι twice (p. 14—see Usener’s note, p. 34). An additional early ex. of this shortening of-to-nouns may be found in a Ptolemaic ostrakon in Mélanges Nicole, Ὁ. 184, συνψέλειν (7.6. -cov). (The document has the word xpdéBaros, so spelt.)
Pp. 49.—The NT forms συγγενίς and cvyyevetor (WH App 158) are both cited by Thumb from Asia Minor (JHS xxii. 358 and BCH xxiv. 839). Σνγγενέσι occurs Tb P 61 (ii/B.c.) αἴ. So we have double forms, ἐσθῆσιν OP 466 and ἐσθήσεσι (as NT) BU 16, both ii/a.p.
P. 50.—Mr R. R. Ottley notes a probable ex. of πλήρης indecl. in Is 63? B.
P. 59.—An apparent false concord in B, περὶ πάντων ὧν εἶδεν δυνάμεων (LK 1951), is corrected by Prof. Burkitt from the Old Syriac, which shows that δυνάμεων is a mere gloss. B accordingly shows the first stage of corrup- tion, while Ὁ (γεινομένων) shows an independent gloss, and the other MSS present a completely regularised text. (The textual phenomena here are most instructive: cf what is quoted from Wellhausen about B and D, p. 242.) Note that in MGr πᾶσα survived was, as πᾶσα ἕνας ‘‘ every one.”
Jfb.—For indeclinable τε Dr Rouse reminds me of the MGr κἄτι, as κἄτι ἡσυχία, ‘a little rest.”
Ρ, 60.—Mr Ottley calls my attention to Is 8738, where it is very hard to resist the impression that an accusative stands for a genitive in apposition to an indeclinable.
Jb.—A better account of ἡ θεός in Ac 1957 is given by G. Thieme, Die Inschriften von Magnesia am Maeander und das NT (Gottingen, 1905), pp. 10 f. He notes that the classical 7 θεός often appears in Magnesian inscriptions to describe the great goddess of the city, while other people’s goddesses were @eal, the usual Kow4 term. The town clerk is accordingly using the technical term, as we might expect. Plentiful quotations are given by Nachmanson, p- 126. We may therefore keep Blass’s comment on Luke’s accuracy, but apply it in a different way.
ADDITIONAL NOTES TO THE SECOND EDITION. 245
P. 63.—It might be added that before ἐν disappeared it was often used for els, just as εἰς was for ἐν. Thus in the two Pelagia stories we find ἀνήλθομεν ἐν τῷ κελλίῳ (i. 4), ἀπήλθαμεν ἐν τῇ μεγάλῃ ἐκκλησίᾳ (i. 5), ἔφυγον ἐν τοῖς ὄρεσι (ii, 1). Some further quotations for late uses of ἐν will be found in Kuhring’s useful Program on the prepositions in the papyri (Bonn, 1906), pp. 48 f.
Ib.—On ὥραν (Jn 454, Ac 10” al) see Ε΄. A. Abbott, Johannine Grammar 75, who suggests that the change from vernacular acc. to dat., Jn 457%, is brought in to denote exact time.
P. 64.—For χρᾶσθαι c. acc. add Wis 71} (B—so the Revisers). The Purist Kontos (Πλωσσικαὶ Παρατηρήσεις, Athens, 1882, p. 420) complains of writers who used καταχρᾶσθαι (and even ἕπεσθαι 1) with gen. As carly as ii/A.D. we find a chiliarch of a Thracian cohort writing ‘Qplwvos (¢.e. -t) χαίρειν (Wilcken, Ostr. ii. 927) : so σὺν Μηνοφίλου ἐδ. 240 (same date).
P. 66.—On the construction of ἀκούω, γεύομαι, and προσκυνῶ, see Abbott, Joh. Gram. 76-78.
P, 67.—With Deissmann’s translation of Mk 11° we may compare ἐν νόμῳ, Gal 37 B, ‘‘ righteousness would lie in the sphere of law.”
P. 70.—Dr Rouse compares with this nominative in time-expressions Aeschines’ νὺξ ἐν μέσῳ καὶ ἦλθεν.
P. 71.—On the threefold πατήρ in Jn 17, see Abbott, op. οἱξ, 96 f.
P. 72.—A full study of prepositions replacing the simple gen. may be found ‘in Kuhring, Praepos. 11ff., 20. Dr Rouse notes that ἀπό is regniarly used in partitive sense now: δῶσε μου ἀπὸ τοῦτο, ‘‘ give me some of that.”
P. 75.—For ἔρχομαί σοι I should have quoted the well-known line of Aeschy- lus (PV 358), ἀλλ᾽ ἦλθεν αὐτῷ Ζηνὸς ἄγρυπνον βέλος.
P. 76.—Reference should have been made to Eph 55, ἴστε γινώσκοντες, where Dean Robinson assumes Hebraism, comparing 1 Sam 20°, γινώσκων older, Jer 42 (49)*?, tore (imper.) γινώσκοντες ὅτι (Symmachus). So RV. If this be so, we can only suppose Paul definitely citing OT language, just as a preacher using the archaic phrase ‘‘ Know of a surety” would be immediately recognised as quoting. (It may be noted that if fore is indic. it is a purely diterary word, such as Paul is not very likely to have used: it would be less improbable in Heb 1211, But in these places and Jas 119 the imper. seems better, somewhat in the sense of the common classieal εὖ ἴσθ᾽ ὅτι, ‘‘ you may be sure”: see LS 3.1. οἷδα 7.) Itis, however, at least as probable that we are to separate the verbs and read ‘‘For you must be assured of this (the following), recognising for yourselves that...” So E. Haupt, Salmond, and T. K. Abbott.
P. 79.—Dr E. A. Abbott (Joh. Gram. 510) makes it seem probable that the Leyden papyrus is quoting from Jn 115, He would translate πρῶτός μου ‘my Chief.” See pp. 11-14 for his exposition, which brings in several harmonics beside the main note. I am not yet disposed to give up the view defended in the text. If Dr Abbott takes away one parallel, he gives me two new ones instead, in the quotations from scholiasts on Euripides ; and his exegesis seems open to the charge of over-subtlety. Moreover, the Aeclian passage, οἱ rpwrol μου ταῦτα ἀνιχνεύσαντες (N.A. viii. 12), is closely parallel for Jn 15'8; and the doubts as to the reading expressed by the Thesaurus editor here and in Plutarch, Cato Minor § 18 (οὔτε πρώτός τις ἀνέβη. . . Karwvos οὔτε ὕστερος ἀπῆλθε), only mean that a modern scholar thought πρώτος incorrect, which is undeniable. I am tempted to claim that Dr Abbott has proved my point for me.
P. 80.—I must confess to a rather serious oversight in omitting to discuss the ‘‘ Hebraistic” use of πᾶς with negative in the sense of οὐδείς. In CR xv. 442, xviii. 155, I quote a number of exx. of πᾶς with prepositions and
246 A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
adjectives of negative meaning: thus ἄνευ or χωρὶς πάσης ὑπερθέσεως, a recurrent formula, ἀνυπεύθυνοι παντὸς ἐπιτίμον Tb P 105 (ii/B.c.), δίχα πάσης ἐξουσίας Plutarch Cons. ad Uxor. 1 (cf Heb 77). Closely allied to this is the Κοινή use of τις with negative, as μηδεμιᾶς κρατήσεως μηδὲ κυριείας τινὸς éyyalou περιγινομένης αὐτώι TP 1 (1,8.0.}, which has analogues in MGr (Jannaris HG § 1449 ὁ). This was accordingly claimed as ‘‘a very slight extension of a vernacular usage under the encouragement of a similar idiom in Hebrew.” It is found not only in presumed translation, as Mk 13™, but in Paul, as Eph 5°.
Jo.—Mr J. B. Shipley sends me an ingenious suggestion that ἑπτά arose from a gloss, Σκευᾶ = pad =éwrd,
io. —In Gal 1% Ramsay maintains against Lightfoot that ἕτερος when definitely contrasted with ἄλλος denotes specific difference against generic, ‘‘another of the same kind,” against ‘‘another of a different kind.” Space precludes examination of his classical exx.; but it must not be too hastily assumed that Lightfoot is wrong.
P, 86.—Karl Dick’s ‘‘ particularly good ex.” of the plural for sing. appears less convincing on re-reading: the plural seems to refer distinctly to the writer and his comrades. Hibeh P. 44 ὁρῶντες. . . ὥιμην is an early ex.
P. 87.—The reciprocal els τὸν ἕνα (1 Th 5!!) may be noted, with the MGr ὁ ἕνας τὸν ἄλλον. (Dr Rouse tells me the Purists say ἔσφαξε ὁ μὲν τὸν δέ ! !)
Jb.—On ‘‘ exhausted ἴδιος ᾿᾿ see now Kuhring, Praep. 18.
P. 89.—Dr Marcus Dods criticises my treatment of ἐν τᾷ ἰδίῳ νοΐ, remark- ing that the danger was of a man’s being ‘‘assured by some other person’s convictions.” That is, of course, quite true, but I think my statement holds that the phrase simply lays stress on the personal pronoun—‘‘ let each man be fully assured for himself.”
P. 96.—Note that δώδεκα greatly predominates over δέκα δύο in ostraka.
P, 99.—For ἐνώπιον now add Hibeh P. 80 (before 271 B.c.),.
P, 102.—In Kuhring’s account of ἀπό (Praep. 35 ff., 52 ff.) there is striking evidence of the encroachments of this preposition. The regular commercial ἔσχον ἀπὸ (not παρὰ) σοῦ may save us from over-refining in 1 Co11%. The note as to the perplexing rarity in the papyri of ἀπό with the agent after passive verbs will prevent us from assuming it too readily in the NT, though its occa- sional presence is undoubted. For oval... ἀπὸ τῶν σκανδάλων (Mt 187) I may quote excellent parallels from Pelagia, ὦ Bla ἀπὸ τοῦ . . . λήρου τούτου (Usener, pp. 11 dis, 27), and ὦ ἀπὸ τῶν Χριστιανῶν (p. 28): the difference in the interjection shows that this was not imitation. Usener (p. 44) notes ὦ Bla ‘‘Murder!” as a vernacular phrase. "Ex of material (as Mt 27%) Kuhring only finds once, AP 99 (ii/A.D.): add Mél. Nicole, p. 281, περιτραχηλίδιον ἐκ καθορμίων λιθινῶν, ‘a necklace made of strings of stones” (iii/B.c.). As to the survival of ἐκ to-day authorities differ: the Athenaewm reviewer cites among others Psichari, who says of ἐκ τόν, ““ C’est bel et bien une forme vivante.”
P. 103.—There seem to be places where εἰς actually supplies for the posses- sive genitive, as Deissmann BS 117 f. shows it does for the dative: TbP 16 οὐ λήγοντες τῆι (for τῆς 1) [els] αὐτοὺς αὐθαδίᾳ, ““ ποὺ desisting from their violent behaviour” (ii/B.C.); χωρὶς τοῦ εἰς αὐτὴν οἴκον (=ov) Par P 5, ‘‘her house” (ib.). It is tempting to seek help here for 1 Pet 111, but the illiteracy of the documents must be remembered.
P. 106.—One more quotation should be made from Kuhring, whose pamphlet must be constantly in our hands as we study the NT prepositions. He seems to demolish even the solitary Hebraism I had left to μετά, that in Lk 158, AP 135 (ii/A.D.) has τί δὲ ἡμεῖν συνέβη μετὰ τῶν ἀρχόντων ; ‘* What befell us
--- «-- -
ADDITIONAL NOTES TO THE SECOND EDITION. 247
in connexion with the magistrates?’’ (G. and H.). So also BU 798 (Byz.). Kontos (Παρατηρήσεις 409 ff.) fiercely attacks πολεμώ μετά τινος, ‘fight with,” ἦ.6. ‘against’; but he is at least eighteen centuries late.
16.—One force of παρά in composition is noted by Thumb (Neue Jahrb. ’06, p. 249), with reference to παρῆλθεν in Mt 144% He parallels Wellhausen’s ‘* vorgeriickt ” (our ‘‘ advanced’) by citing MGr παραπάνω, ‘‘ far over,” παρακάτω, “ἐν under,” παραμέσα, ‘‘farin.” Another force is exemplified in παραπίπτω,
‘which Wilcken (Ostraka, i. 78 f.) illustrates as a commercial word, giving Momm-
sen’s ‘‘ungiiltig werden, etwa wegen eines Formfehlers.” He compares Xen. Hell. i. 6. 4, where it is co-ordinated with ἀγνοεῖν, and Polybius, xviii. 36. 6, παραπίπτειν τῆς ἀληθείας.
P. 110.—To the weighty authorities for ἔχομεν in Rom 5! is now added Prof. H. A. A. Kennedy: see ExpT' for July 1906, p. 451.
P. 112.—Usener (Pelagia, 49) remarks on ἀπέρχομαι that in later Greek it is transferred to the thought of the goal. Thus ἀπήλθαμεν ἐν τῇ μεγάλῃ ἐκκλησίᾳ = ‘Swe arrived at the great church.” ᾿Αφικνοῦμαι was much earlier in showing this result of perfective ἀπό.
P. 115.—In Neue Jahrb. 1906, pp. 254 ff., Prof. Thumb justifies his view
‘that Miss Purdie’s general position is right, though pure Kow# texts like the
NT and the papyri would have served better than a writer like Polybius, belonging to a transition period of the language. He points out that by this development of the prepositions Hellenistic gains the means of expressing aoristic Aktionsart in present time. Thus “ἀπέχουσι (Mt 6? © 16) is in its Aktionsart identical with ἔλαβον or ἔσχον, that is, it is an aorist-present, which denotes the present answering to λαβεῖν or σχεῖν. The recognition of punctiliar force in this commercial word (see Deissmann BS 229) makes it very vivid in Mt /.c.: the hypocrites have as it were their money down, as soon as their trumpet has sounded.
P, 122.—Mr H. Ὁ. Naylor sends me some additional notes as to the μὴ “ποίει canon. Some of his classical exx. against Dr Headlam are very good : note Aristoph. Av. 1534, where the conative present seems clear, and Ran. 618-622, Mr Naylor remarks, ‘‘I venture to hold the view that the distinction is a growth. It was beginning in classical times; it was nearly crystallised in NT Greek ; and it is completely so in the modern language.” In other words, usage progressively restricted the various possible forces of ποίει in this locution, till onlyjone was left. Mullach treated the matter well (pp. 845 f.), as the Athenaeum reviewer notes.
P. 129.—The present of this conative ἠνάγκαζον is well seen in Gal 61. With reference to Thumb’s argument on προσφέρω, I find it easier to deny him Heb 117’, as I can give him a good ex. in a less literary writer: πρόσφερε τὸ δώρον in Mt 5%4 is very probably aorist in action.
ib.—The differentia of the aorist may be effectively brought in to decide the famous difficulty in 1 Co 774. If Paul meant ‘‘go on in your slavery,” he must have said χρῶ : the aorist χρῆσαι can only be ‘‘ seize the opportunity.”
P. 184.—For Jn 15° we might add a Hellenistic parallel : Epictetus iv. 1. 39, dy μὲν στρατεύσωμαι, ἀπηλλάγην πάντων τῶν κακῶν. 1 Co 7% and Gal 5‘ may be noted.
P, 185.—An idiomatic old aorist belonging to this category still survives : a traveller in Cos ‘‘ had a pleasant shock, on calling for a cup of coffee, to hear the waiter cry Εφθασα.᾽"
Ρ, 141.—In a discussion of aorist and perfect (Am. Journ. Theol. x. 102 f.), in which Latinism is regarded as contributory to the fusion, E. J, Goodspeed
248 .A GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK.
remarks on the curious development in the formulsw with the verb διαγράφω, ‘‘nay,” in receipts. The Ptolemaic documents have διαγέγραφεν, the early Roman διαγεγράφηκεν. Then in twelve years, towards the end of i/a.p., the aorist suddenly and completely ousts the perfect, having previously only appeared once, cir. 40 A.D., and the change occurs simultaneously in Ele- phantine and Thebes. It affects no other words: μεμέτρη-μαι and «κεν continue unchanged.
P. 142.—Mr Ottley has noted no case of aoristic perfect in Isaiah except in the category of aorist and perfect standing together, joined by καί.
ib.—Pauline exx. of the perfect for what ‘‘stands written’? may be seen in Gal 818 4%,
P. 145.—Second thoughts as to ἐσχήκαμεν in Rom 57 make me very doubtful whether my view of the perfect will stand for that passage. “Eoyouev, ‘‘ we received,” or ἐσχήκαμεν, ‘‘ we have received,” will suit; but there seems to be no point in the constative ‘‘we possessed.” If therefore my suggestion is to hold, it becomes a mannerism which Paul dropped between the writing of ‘¢3 Corinthians” and Romans. On the other hand, another papyrus can be quoted where ‘‘ possessed ’’ suits the sense well, and the perfect stands in close connexion with the aorist: BU 297 (end of ii/A.D.), rots δικαίαν αἰτίαν ἐσχηκόσι καὶ ἄνεν τινὸς ἀμφισβητήσεως ἐν τῇ νομῇ γενομένους (= -ors).
P. 159.—On the verb παρέχωτε ραν, Wilcken observes (Ostraka, i. 107) that even in RL (iii/B.c.) the word occurs often both in act. and in mid. apparently without distinction. These sporadic exx. of irregular middles occur in the earliest period of the Kow#, but they do not invalidate the general rule.
P. 168.—-The papyrus exx. of ravy=when make it an open question whether in Mk 1119 we are not to translate ‘‘ when evening fell,” that is the evening before the πρωΐ of v.%. In such a writer as Mk this is at least possible, and the other rendering produces an awkward sequence. The impf. ἐξεπορεύοντο may be pictorial quite as well as iterative. (Note ἐὰν ἦσθα HbP 78.)
P. 177.—Prof. W. Rhys Roberts suggests to me another ex. of wc. fut. in Eurip. Afed. 822, λέξεις δὲ μηδέν. . ., where the change to λέξῃς (especially in that order) has always seemed to him arbitrary. ‘‘ Probably there are other similar cases in which the MS reading should he carefully weighed.”
P. 179.—Add for imperatival ἵνα ὁ. snbj. (or fut.) 1 Co 739, and Epictetus iv. 1. 41, ἵνα μὴ μωρὸς 7, GAN ἵνα μάθῃ, ‘let him not be a fool, but learn. .. .” Dr J. O. F. Murray suggests to me that this ἵνα may be recognised in Rev 1473, Since the jussive Hequiescant falls from Divine lips, it has no bearing on con- troverted questions. Its superior fitness in the grammatical structure of the verse is undeniable. In 1 Co 145 we havea good ex. of θέλω iva and θέλω c. inf. side by side with no real difference.
Io.—Prof. Burkitt (Hvang. da-Mepharr. ii. 252f.) reads in Mt 23% ταῦτα δὲ ποιῆσαι κἀκεῖνα μὴ ἀφεῖναι, after the Lewis, supposing the MSS readings to be corrections. In 2 Co 12!he would follow δὲ in reading καυχᾶσθαι----οὐ συμφέρον μὲν---ἐλεύσομαι δὲ x.7.A., Which is presumably ‘‘ Now to boast !—it is not ex- pedient, but I shall be coming,” etc. There seems no special difficulty about infin. for imper. here, and Aramaism is entirely out of court. If Prof. Burkitt’s reading be accepted in Mt J.c., it is ‘‘ translation Greek ’’ no doubt, but perfectly allowable.
P. 185.—The use of μή in warning retains still the consciousness of its paratactic origin. Dr Rouse quotes φοβοῦμαι μήπως ἀπέθανε (cf Gal 4", 2 Co 113) with the ‘independent μήπως in questions expressing surprise or indignation (μήπως εἶμαι λόρδος ; ‘do you suppose I’m a millionaire ?”’) (Mullach, pp. 395 f.).
ADDITIONAL NOTES TO THE SECOND EDITION. 249
ib.—In Gal 6!° WH read ὡς καιρὸν ἔχωμεν (nB*17). As we have seen on Rom 5', the MSS can hardly perhaps be regarded as decisive between o and w ; but the subj. is justifiable with the sense ‘‘as long as we have opportunity, let us continue to work.” (Qs in MGr takes the meaning of éws as well as its own.) In classical Greek this futuristic subj. would demand ἄν, but words meaning until constantly drop it in Hellenistic.
P. 188.—Dr Giles tells me that Gildersleeve’s suggestion of an independent ov in οὐ μή was anticipated in the Middle Ages: in one if not both of the best MSS of Aristophanes it is regularly punctuated οὔ" μή. . . .
P. 205.—Dr House has noticed the old infin. in Cos, as ἔχω ᾿δεῖν, “1 have seen.” Prof. Thumb (Neue Jahrb. ’06, p. 259) observes that the infin. of purpose is commoner in Homer than in Attic: the preference accordingly has lingered in Asiatic and island Greck?for three thousand years.
P. 206.—Dr E. A. Abbott reinforces the depleted ranks of scholars who would press the telic force of ἵνα in Jn. We might cite such passages as 1518 as affording scope for exegetical ingenuity on these lines. If we had no evidence from Hellenistic and MGr as to the loss of this force in iva, we might accept such subtleties of interpretation as at least not out of character with so allusive a writer. But with our present knowledge we should need much stronger evidence than is offered to prove that Jn differed so greatly from his contemporaries.
P. 207.—Prof. Burkitt notes (Hv. da-Meph. ii. 183) that Tatian took wore as consecutive in Lk 4”, ‘‘so that they cast him down.”
Ρ, 209.—The consecutive ὅτε which Blass would read in Jn 816 does appear in later Greek, e.g. Pelagia, 20, τί διδοῖς τοῖς ἀμνοῖς σον, ὅτι ζωὴν αἰώνιον ἔχουσιν; See KE. A. Abbott, Joh. Gr. p. 534.
P, 210.—The consecutive use of ἵνα was recognised by Lightfoot in Gal 51”, 1 Th δ΄ : see his notes, and cf what he says on els τὸ c. inf. in 1 Th 216,
P, 212.—For classical exx. of acc. and infin. where nom. would have been regular, cf Aeschylus PV 268 f. and the note of Sikes and Wynne- Willson ; also Adam’s note on Plato Apol. 36 B.
P. 227.—The periphrastic imperf. occurs several times in Pelagia, as p. 14, ἤμην ἀπερχόμενος ; 18, ἣν ἀκούσασα : note also p. 26, ἔσο γινώσκων, like ἔσθι εὐνοῶν in Mt δ35, Cf Usener’s note p. 50. That this is pure vernacular, untainted by Hebraism, is beyond question. Dr Rouse observes that it is used now in Zaconian, a8 popodvrep ἔμε = ἐφοροῦμεν, ὁρούμενερ Fut = ὁρώμαι,
P. 237.—-A further addition to the list on p. 95 is given by Prof. Burkitt in Mt 10" Ὁ and 28, ἡ πόλις els ἣν ἂν εἰσέλθητε els αὐτήν (Ev. da-Meph. ii. 75). This goes naturally with the passages supporting Wellhausen’s thesis (above, p. 242).
P. 240.—If μὴ γένοιτο is “ἃ phrase of learned origin,” it is presumably parallel with some other survivals in idiomatic phrases, for which Dr Rouse instances μετὰ χαρᾶς, ἀπὸ βροχῆς, τέλος πάντων, τῷ ὄντι, παντάπασι. Dr Rouse himself has never heard μὴ γένοιτο, for which the people say ὁ θεὸς νὰ φυλάξῃ.
I. INDEX TO QUOTATIONS.
—__4———
(a) NEw TESTAMENT.
MATTHEW MATTHEW—continued MATTHEW—continued
PAGE PAGE PAGR
1.18. . . 46.177. . 85, 286 | 12. 238. ° . 140 19. . . 230/619 . - 58, 240} 12. 42. . . 236 20 . 124|6.27 . . . 280] 13.2 . - 280, 241 2: - . 69,86 | 6.28 . 117 | 13. 5-8 . 79 22 . . 106,7.1r ~~ . . 191 | 13. 14 . . . 7ὅ Ι . 4817.4 . 175,176 | 13.15 . . . 140 2 . 138, 204 | 7.9 e 193 | 13.17. . . 189 3 . 481] 7. 13 » « 174 | 13. 24 - « 140 4 . . 120) 7. 16 . . ὅ9| 13.28. . 140 10 . . 117|7.22. . . 138 | 13. 30 . . 97 15 . 188/ 7.23 . . . 174 | 13. 32. . . 53 20 . 58/81. . . 1}4|132.4. . . 189 23 17 8. 8 . . 208 | 13.46 . 142, 148, 145 4 91, 102 | 8. 10 ° 140 | 14.2 . . . 140 7 116, 188 | 8. 19 . 97 | 14.15 . . 140, 247 9 . 15,124 | 8. 25 . .- 114] 14. 19 . . . 107 It . 208 | 8. 3 . 172 | 15. 5 . 177 14 . . 129] 8 34 . . . 14] 15.6 . 140 17. . 104) 9.1 . . 90|15.12. 139 3 . 208/98 . . . δ᾽ 15.24. . . 188 12 129, 1741 9.1ο. . 16,17 15.322. , . 70 17. . . 188)/9.18 . 714, 140 16.7 . . . 1389 im . . 58,181] 9.34 . . . 104] 16.17. . . 140
AND θυ θι οι οιψισισισι σισιψισισψισισισισιμι ψισιυισδ ΟΝ ΝΝΝΝΝΝΝ ΗΜ μα με
21, εἰς. 188, 140, 186 10.5 . . . 188 16.20. . . 208 25. . 174,226] 10.8 . . . 189] 16.22 . 190, 191, 240 26. . . 101|1το.9. . . 125] 16. 26 . . . 280 27. - . . 188] το. το. . . 88/17.9 . . . 125 28. 65, 140, 218 | 10. 19. . . ,985᾽|17.12. . 188, 140
. 210] 10.25 . 140, 208, 210 | 17. 14 . . . 44 188, 186 | ro. 26. . . .
321. . 191 | 18.1 . . 78 33. - « 188] to, 28. . . 102/186 . : . 208 34,36 . . 126 | 10.290. . . 286] 18 11 . . . 187 28 - . . 188 | 10. 32. . . 104] 18.13. . . 17 39 - . 1}1719,1174 | 10.34f.. . . 188] 18. 15. . . 140 40 . . . 69] 10. 42. . . 188] 18. 22. . . 98 42. . 129,174] 1n7 . - . 11] 18.23. . 140, 160 43. . . 188|11.3. . . 185] 18.25 . . . 219 4) - . . 186Ὶ]1τι.6.. . - 104/ 19.6 , . . 140 2 . . 159,186 | 11.17. . . 189] 19.12, . 189 3. . . . 174] 11.20. . . 791} 19.27. . . 140 Ir. . 129,174] 11.25 . 91, 136, 189 | 19. 29. . . 140 Ι2, . 187, 140 11. 27. . . 14012..ὺ0ὺ.. . . 140 11. . . 125 | 12.323, εἴς. . . 140! 20.12. . . 140 16 . . . 186{12.7 . «. « 148 20. 20, 22 . 160 250
MATTHEW—continued
59,
18
INDEX TO QUOTATIONS.

MatTrTHEW—continued PAGE | PAGE . . 45 ' 27. 44 7. ¢ @ ° 58 - »« 24112746. . .« 140 ° . 105 | 27. 49 . . 175, 230 . 188,140 : 27.62. . . 91 . . 179 | 28.1. . . 72, 73 . . 139 | 28.7. . . . 140 . . 216} 2815 . . . 189 188, 189, 140 | 28. 18 . . . 14 . . 181 28,20. . . 189 e es 140 ν . 88, 90 . 281, 282 | MRK . . 104. 1.ὺ . . 95, 237 140, 185, 248 | 1.1. . . 184 ° . 201|1.15. - 67, 245 . 116,185 | 1.17 . . . 45 . . 191) rn25 . . . 176 . . 174} 1.36. . . . 116 » . 124) 1.44. . ἢ . 124 . . 100,2: . . . 82 . . 190,23. . . 222 . . 20᾽1|2.5... . . 119 ον 40127 . ..-. 981 . . 142/2.15 . . 16,17 . 14,146|2.22 . 16, 17, 159 184, 189,192 | 3.9. . . . 208 . . 116) 3.11. . 168 . . 160] 3.16 . . 469, 235 . . 140] 2.2. . 106, 184 . . 238 | 2.26., . . 187 . . 14400} 4.1-. . . 241 e ° 238 4. 5-8 . e Φ 79 ~ « 188])4.:8 . . . 108 . . 188 | 4.22 . - 191, 241 . . 221|4.26. . . 185 . . 120)4.2. . 46, 50 . . 157 | 4.32 . . . 58 . 116, 140 4.39 . e e 176 . . 140] 4.41 . . . 58 . . 200; 5.10 . . . 208 . . 140|κ.13 - . . 172 . . 212/5.15 . . . 145 . 190,191) 5.19 . . . 148 . - 93/5.23 . . . 179 . . 157] 5.34 . . 174, 226 . δ0 5.26. . . 124 - 8606,1,40|6.14,.}4 . . 127 . . 140] 6.17f.. . . 94 . . 207 | 6. 22-25 . . 160 . 140,177 | 6.25 . . . 179 . . 155/6.26 . . . 51 . . 86|6.2333. . . 170 . . 140 | 6. 30f.. . 97, 107 . 183 | 6.56 . . 167, 168 . 17,102] 7.12 . . . 191 »  « 1400]7.25 . -18, 94, 95 . . 90|γχ.26. . . 178 Φ . 14 7° 28 . Φ Φ 189 ° . 157;82 .- . . 70 . « 12|8.3 =. . . 8
251
MARK—continued
PAGE 8.7) . . . 52 8.14. . . 170 8.19 . . . 60 8.24 . . . 94 8.26. . . 125 8.36. . . 87 9.18. . . 186 9.25 . ἢ . 128 9.33 . . . 129 9.39 . . 125, 174 9.41. . 100, 188 10.7 . . . 91 10. 13. . . 59 10. 20 . . . 159 10. 29 . . . 191 10. 32. . . 227 10. 35, 23 ὃ - . 160 10. 35. . . 179 10. 45 . . . 10ὅ Io. 51 . . . 179 11.11ἰ- . . 172 11.14- . 165, 179 11.16. . . 176 11. 19. . 168, 248 II. 25. . - 168 12,11 . . . 659 12.14 . . . 185 12. 23. . . 14 12. 40 . . - 60 121 .ὅ . . 74 12:2 - . 189, 191 13.6 . . . 175 132.11 . . . 91 13. 13. . . 150 13.19 . . . 95 13. 24-27. . 150 13. 31 . . 190, 191 14.3 - . 65,176 14.6 . . . 175 14.8 . . . 176 14.10. . . 97 14.14. . . 151 14.18 . . . 1. 14.19. . . 10ὅ 14. 21. . 171, 200 14. 28 . . . 149 14. 322 . . . bl 14. 31 . . 190, 191 14. 32 . . . 169 14. 36 . . 98, 238 14. 38 . . . 178 14. 42 . . . 175 14. 47 . . . 157 14. 63 . . . 88 14. 72. . . 181 15.1 . . . 159 15.2 - . . 86 15.15 « . . 20 15.18 . . . 1 15. 25 - . . 12
252
MarK—continued PAGE 15. 36 . oe . « 118 15. 42 51 16. 6
: χϑδ, 187, 163 [16.]9-20 . . 216
[16.] 18 ° . 191 LUKE 7 .- 75, 108 15. . 177, 191 18. . 45 20 . ° . 92 28 - . 188 28 - . . 195 43 208, 211, 217 54, 72 . . 210 58 . 106, 246 59 . . . 129 62 . . . 198 76f.. . . 217 9 - . 217 I . . 47 I, 3 . 162 4 . » 91, 212 5. . . 162 26. 169 46. . $5 39 . 130 49 . . 103 8. . 15 I5. . 194, 199 16. 95, 237 22. . 227 23 ff.. . 236 ΙΟ . . 116 i . 143 25 60 261. 24] 33. 227 42 220 19 . . 18 232 = . . 119 28. . . 222 I. . . VY 3. . . 168 4.. . . 171 11. . . 198 1. . 65 2. . 129, 174 29. 79, 125, 174 30 . 119, 129, 174 25. . . . 65 327 . . . 191 41 - . . 90 42 . 175, 281, 232 6. . . 156 13. . . 125 16. 135 1of.. - 80 32. . 82
VAIWWWAADAAAADAAAADANANNUUMPHADPAHWWWWNHN NPY YY Poe μα μα
LUKE—continued
PAGE 8. 6-8 . . . 79 8.27 - . ~ 465 8.29 . 75, 118, 148 8.38 . . - 54 8.42 . . 114 8.43. : . 102 8.466. . . 229 8. 49 121, 125 8. 52 . . 125 8. 54 . . 70 9. 3 . . 179 9.13 . .. 171, 187 9. 25 87, 230 9. 28 . 70 9. 31 53, 171 9. 36 52, 144 9. 45 . . 210 9. 46 . 198 9. 54 . 185 10, I . 97 10. 4 . 125 10.7 - 91, 12ὅ 10. 18 . . 184 IO. 20 125 10. 2: . - 91 10. 36. . 146 10. 42 . . . 92 II. 3 129, 173, 174 11. 4 . . 119 1.7 . . . 125 11. 35. . 192 rr. 411. . 15 11. 46 . 56 121 . 102, 157 122 . ‘ » 191 12.4 » . . 102 12.8 . . . 104 [2. 12 . . 91 12.15 . . 157, 178 12.20. . . 58 12. 24,27 . 117 12, 26 . . 286 12. 32. . 70 12. 35 . . . 176 12. 36 . . . 74 12. 39 . . . 201 12. 58 . . . 174 12.59 . . 955,191 13.8. . . . 169 13.16 . . . dll 13. 24 . . 174 13. 27 . . 174 13. 34. . 45 13. 35 - . 191 14.7 . . 157 14. 8 . . 125 14. 12 . . 125 14.18 . . . 90 14. 20 . . 18ὅ 14. 28. . 194
INDEX TO QUOTATIONS.
LuKE—continued
PAGE 15. 14 . . . 60 15. 17. . . 114 15-19 . . . 208 15. 26. . 198 15. 32. . 135 16.17 . . ~ 191 16. 22. . 16 17.1. . 217 17.8 . ι . 98 17. 23. . δ9 18. 1. . 218 18.2. . 65 18.7 , . . 159 18. 10 . . 205 18. 16 . 124 18. 36 . . 198 18. 41 . . 185 19.2 . . 86 19. 13 . 35, 118 19. 17 . 174, 226 Ig. 29 . . 69 20. 23 . . 117 20.16 . - 194, 240 20. 36 . . . 114 21.6 . - 69, 191 21.8 . . 125 21.22. . 217 21. 33. 190, 191 21. 37. . . 69 22.6 . . 220 22. 23. . . 199 22. 34. . . 289 22. 44. . δὲ 22.49. 11, 185 22.65 . . . 231 22.70. . 86 23.3. . . 86 23.5. . 45, 240 23. 28 . . . 125 24.22 . . 51 24. 34. . 185 24. 47, 49 . 182 27.49 . 175
JOHN
I.5  . . . 158 1.6. . . 70 IQ. . 227 1. . . 90 1.12... . . 115 I.14.. - 50, 82, 83 ΙΓ. 79, 147, 245 1.16 . .. - 100 1.18. . 144, 235 1.27. . 208, 237 I. 41. . . 90 2.5 . . . 186 2,16 . ° . 125 3307 . - 124, 126
INDEX TO QUOTATIONS. 253°
JoHN—continued JOHN—continued Acts—continued PAGE PAGE PAGE 3.16 . . . 209/15.6 . 59, 184, 247) 5.2 . . 287 3.18 . . 171, 239 | 15.813. . 208) 5.7 =. 16, 70, 233 3. 19 ° e 140 15. 13 Φ . . 211 5- 14 . Φ 67, 68 3. 32 . . 1438] 15.316. . . 65/5.15 . . . 85 4. 10 . 20] | 15.18 . . 79, 245| 5.17 . . . 228 4. 18 . 145 | 15. 22, 24 . 52] 5.21 . . 287 4. 23 . 66 | 15.27 . . . 119] 5. 24 . . 198 4.29 - . 170,193 | 16.17 . . 102 | 5.39 . . . 198 4.34 - + 208,ϑ,210| 16.232. . . 66/63 . . - 650 4.35 - . 12 | 17.3 . . 118, 206 | 6.5 . . 50 4. 52 . . 68) 17.23. . » 284/75 =~. . 281, 232 5: 7 . . 219 17. 24 ΝΜ e e 179 7. II e 9 107 5. 13 Φ 210 17. 25 Φ e . 118 7. 12 ° ° Φ 285 5. 14 . . 125 | 18.20. . 286 7.14. ‘ . 108 5. 18 . 90] 18. 34. . . 87|7. 20 . . 104 5. 24 . . 67| 18.37. . 86 7. 26 . . 129 5. 36 49 | 18.39. . . 210/731 . . . 117 5. 37 . 144 τοθ.2 . . . 70| 7.35 . . . 144 5. 38 . 67 | 19. 11 148| 7.36 . . - 188 6. 10 . 68, 75 | 19. 21 . . 125|7.40 . . 69 6. 25 146 | 19. 24 . 167} 75. Ὁ. . . 125 6. 57 . 105 | 19. 25 . 106| 8:16. . . 107 6. ξ9 - «+ 236 | 20.1 - . 222)8.20 . 195 6. 68 - - 88|20.2 . . 9, 8.22. . 71, 235 7.4 . 212 | 20.17,27 . . 125) 831 . . . 198 [8. 9] . 105 | 20. 19 . 188.:9.7.'' .- . . 66 [8. 11] . . 189 | 20. 25 . 49,191 |} 9.15 . . 217 8.31 . - 67 | 21.3 τς 204 9.34 - . 119 8. 32,,3 - 149 | 21. 3 . . 1701] 9. 38 . . 125 8.33 - . 144 | 21. . 102 } 10. 15 125 8.38 . . 85 | 21. 10 . . 185] 10.17. . 198 8.59 - . 156, 161 | 21. 23 - « 114] 10. 25 . 16, 217 9.2. - . 210 | 21. 24 . ~ 9] 10.28. . . 286 9.17 - . 94 21. 25 . 205 | 10. 33 - 181, 228 10.5 > . 190 10. 37 . . 240 10. 12 - . 2381, 232 11. 25 . 235 10. 29 - . - 50 AoTs 11. 28 60, 92 10. 37 - . . 125 12.6 . . 114 .2 - . 1821.1 : . 79|12.17. . 240 .17. . . 861 S . . 21 ]12.25. . 188 .18. . 102|1.12 . 49, 69, 285 | 13.1 . . . 228 . 21, 32 . 201] 1.15 . . . 107 | 13.8 . 286 . 28. . 181] 1. 25 90 | 13.9 . . 88 .42. . . 185] 2.1 . 233 | 13. 10 177 -55- . . 12)2.8 . . 88 13. 22 71 56. ° . 191 | 2. 17, 21 16 | 13. 25 . . 98 121 . .« 100, 101 2. 45 . 167 | 14. 6, 8 48 12. 7 ° © 175 |2.47 . - 107; 14.8 . 221 -9 . ° . 8/38 . . 161 | 14. 13 . . 228 .13. . . 14/312 . . 217 | 14.14. 157 19 . . 135 | 3. 17 - . . 280 | 14.18. . 217, 220 .35. . 158 | 3. 19 218 | 15.17 . . . 237 .40. . 117 | 3. 23 . . 16) 15.20. . . 217 ΑΙ. . 90,1385 | 4.5 . - 16] 15.23. . . 179 .8 . . 177,191) 4.13 . . 168 | 15.27 . . . 280 .13. . . 28δ6[,.4 16. . . 286|15.29. 171, 176, 228 .27. . 286 [4.21 - . 212, 230 15. 37 f. . - 180 -31. . 185 | 4.23 . . . 90] 15. 39. . . 209 14. 31 . . 177 14.35 . - -« 167); 16.6 . . 183, 134 15.4 « . 103, 241; 4.36 . . -. 05; 1613. - 82
254
Aots—continued
| PAGE 16. 18 . . 119, 240 16. ζᾶ. - 125 16. 34 . . 67, 235 16. 36 . . 52 7Ir . . . 280 17.9 - . . 20 17. 18. . . 198 17.26. . . 188 17. 27. . . 290 17. 28.. . . 8] 17.31 . . 240 18. 8 .. 67, 235 189 . . 125 19. 14 . 80, 246 19. 15 . . 181 19. 16 . - 80 19. 26 . . . 728 19. 27 . . 60 19. 28. . 50 10. 32 . . 286 20.3. 217 20.10 . . . 125 20. 16 . 17, 63, 196 20. 18 . . . 56 20. 22 . ° 151 20. 27 . . 217 20. 28 . . 90 20. 29 . . 26 21.14 . . 184 21.16. . 18, 228 21. 22. . . 52 21. 28. . . 148 21.31 . . . 74 21. 33 . 198, 199 21. 40 . 7 22. 2 . 7 22.5 - . 149 22. 9 66 22. 16 . 163 22. 17 . 74 22. 19 . . 227 22. 24 188 23.8 . . 80 23. 21 125 23. 26 . . 179 23. 27 . 117 23. 29 . 289 23. 30 . 74, 176 23. 35 . 188 24.2 . . 106 24.5 - . 224 24.10. . 229 24. 19 . 196 24. 22. 133, 286 24. 23. . 90 24. 24 . . 88, 90 25.9: - . 181 25-10. . . 236 25. 13. . 182, 183 25.16. . 169
AcTs—continued PAGE
25. 25. . . 289 26.2 . ‘ . 148 26.5 . - .« 18 26.7 . . . 70 26.11 . . . 128 26. 20 . . 225 26. 22 . 281, 232 26. 29 - .« 198 27.1 . 69, 217 27. 10 . . 218 27. 12 . . 194 27. 22 . . 241 27. 29 . . 86 27. 34 . . 106 27. 39. 117, 196 28. . . 239 28.15 . 14 28. 17. . 228 28. 17, 19 231, 232 RoMANS I.5 . . 186 1:.9.»ϑσ . . 68 1.10 . . 194 1.20 - . 117, 219 1.24 . . . 217 1.31: . . . 222 1.32 - . . 280 3.13 ὁ . . 662 5.1 85,110, 247, 249 5.2 . . . 145 5.11 . 224 5.12. 107 5.20 . . 207 6.4 . . . 88 6.6. 218 6.11. . . 108 6.11. . 125, 129 7.3 . . . 217 83 - 221 8.9 - 171 8.12. 217 8.15. 10 8.18. . . 114 8.20 . . . 10ὅ 8.28 . . 65 9.3 - . . 212 9.5 . . . 228 9.25 . ° . 281 9.26. ° 16 10.3. ° - 163 10.6 . . . 124 10. 14 . ° . 185 1.4 - . . 59 11..11- . 207 11. 18, 20 . 125 12,3. 219, 237 12,5 . . 105, 188
INDEX TO QUOTATIONS.
RomMans—continued
PAGE 12. 6-8 . . 188 126 . . . 225 12. 9 ff. . . 182 12. 9-19 180 12. 14, 15, 16, 19. 180 12,15 . . 179, 180 12. 16 f. . . 182 13.1 . . . 228 13.9 . . . 87 13.11 . . 182,188 14.5 . . . 89 14. 20 . . 125 14. 23. . . 184 15. I . . 221 15. 4 . . 115 15. 5, 13 . . 195 15. 22.. . . 217 15.23. . . 217 15. 24. . . 167 16.7. 52, 141, 144 16. 25 . . .ς 78
1 CORINTHIANS
1.18. . 114 38 . . 90 3.19 . . . 65 4.3. .- . 210, 236 48 . . . 200 4.21 . . . 12 6.2 . . 103, 236 6.32 - . . 240 6.5. . . 99 6.ἢ . . . 162 6.11 . . . 168 7.2 . . . 89 7.5 . . 169 7.15 . . . 172 7.27 . . . 125 7.31 =. . . 64 7.37 . . . 224 8.6. . . 106 8.13. . . 191 9ο.6 . . . 220 9.10 . . . 217 9.19 . . . 280 9.2: . . . 236 9.26. . . 231 Ιο.2 . . . 168 10. 1. . . 217 10. 29 . . 87 Il. 23 . 287, 246 II. 29 . . 280 Il. 34 . . 167 12. 2 . 115, 167 13. 12 . . 118 13.13 . . 78 14. 5 187, 208, 248 14.8 . ° . 156
-ι-.-- - -
INDEX TO QUOTATIONS.
1 CoRINTHIANS—conid.
.10. .
«11. .
. 27. .
. 39 φ 2
32
PAGE
2 CORINTHIANS
1.4 - . . 98 1.8 . . 217, 220 1.9. . . 145 1.17 . . . 210 2.7 - . 198 2.13. 145, 220 4.8 . . 237 4.89. . . 231 5.3 . . 118 5.4. . . 107 5.19. . 212, 227 6.9 . . . 114 7.5 145, 182, 225 8.6. . . 219 87. . 179 8.11 . . 217 8.18 . . . 68 8.23 . . 105 8.24 . . 181 g. II . . . 182 9.11.12. . . 181 10.2 - . . 212 10.9 2. . « 167] 10. 14. 68 | II. I - 200 | 1.2 . 160 | 1.5. -. 289,Ὰ, 11. 16. . 178 ΣΙ. 21 τς 212 11.25. 144, 145, 148 122 . - 101, 229 12. 9 . . 180 12,17. . 144 12,19 . 119 13. 5 . 171
SUMMNNAAHPHPHPAYYY NNN ΗΜ ΗΜ
HATA PSPLHHWOQWNNN Don we mo
ΝΝΜΗ
GALATIANS PAGE 5 e e ea 183 6 f. . 80, 246 7 . 17] 22, . 227 2 193, 201 IO. . . 179 IZ. . . 209 2 . . 117 17. . 219 23°. . . 114 6. 10, 2338 8. . 9291 Ir. . 193, 248 12. . - 106 27 . . 127, 231 30. . . 177 I. , 61, 125 12 - . 168, 201 14. . 8, I5. - ‘eo 124 16 118, 180, 191 26 . . 177 Σ΄ - . . 90
EPHESIANS I . . . 228 6. - . 98 IO. . . 107 13. 67, 68 15 84, 236 16 159 17 - δῦ, 196 II. . 84, 236 5,8. . . 127 I5 . . . 108 3. . . 239 4 . . . 117 δ᾽, . 236 16. 55 17. . . 182 I+. 84, 93, 236 2,3 - . . 181 21. . . 182 26 . . 125 28 . . . 127 1. . . 126 22 “ . 181 33 . 179 13 . . 115 22 ὁ ο . 135
PHILIPPIANS 5 (le . 84, 236 30 ". . . 225 I . . . 59 12 - . . 174
ec ΠὖᾷΠΠ᾿.-πτλΆῈ1-1...----
255
PHILIPPIANS—continued
PAGE 2.23. . . 167 2.26. . . 227 2.30 . . . 64 3.3. . . . 281 3.4 . . 280 32. . 10, 102 3.Ὀ7ῦ,͵ . . . 148 3. 10 . 218 3. 11f. . 187, 194 3.13 ὁ . . 212 2.16 . 179, 204 3.10 . . 50 3.21 . . . 217 4. II . . 229 4.14 . 228
COLOSSIANS 1.4,8. - 84, 236 I.26 . . 224 2.1 52 22. . . 182 2.8 . 178, 198, 228 2.19 . . . 281 2. 21 . 124 3.9 . . 126 3. 16 . 181, 182 2.17. . - 181,188 3.18 . . . 168 4.6 . . . 188 415. . 48 1 THESSALONIANS 2.4 . 231 2.12 - . . 219 2.16 . . . 219 32.1ῦὃ.. . . 231 3. 2 . 68 3-5 ὁ 198, 201 38. . 108 2.11 . . 179 4.9 . 219 4. 14 149, 162 4.15 . . 191 4.17 . (14 53. . 191 5.4 .- . 210 2 THESSALONIANS
1.8. . 9 2.2 ‘6 . 212 2.3 - . 178 2.17 . . 179 35 . ‘ 179 3.6 . ° - 52 3.13 . . 124
200 INDEX TO QUOTATIONS,
1 TrmoTHy HEBREWs—continued 1 PETER—continued PAGE PAGE PAGER I. 13 . . 280) 7.27 . . . 90/21 . . 53 2. 6 . . 105,8. . . . 56/21 . . 181 4. 14 . . 128 |[80.. . . 14] 2. 24 . . 237 4.15 - . . 184) 8. 10 . 107, 224 | 3.1,7. . . 181 5.I . . 124, 125 9. 12 . 51, 182 | 3.1, 7,9, 15,16. 182 5.13 - . . 229/9.18 . . . 148/33 =~. . . 286 5. 22 . 1Wiliars . . 58,225/3.7 . . . 181 5.23. . 126 10.144... ὃ 0. . 127/38f.,. . . 180 6.3 - . 171 10.16. . 107, 224 | 3. 14 . . 196 10.17 . . . 1900|3.1ὴ. ° . 196 10. 28 . . . 114)4.3 - . . dll 2 TIMOTHY 10. 35. . . 124,),..7 . . 181 1.1. . . 281|[4.88.. . . 181 1.8 . . 124,125} 11.3. . 219 | 4. 11 . . 181 1.11 . . 284) 114.4 . ° . 224|) 412. . . 125 1.12. . . 2064) 1. . . 217|4.1. . . 217 1.16,18  . . 195) 11.12. ° . 230} 4.18 . . . 160 1.18 . 78,286] 11.15. . . 204)5.7 . . . 181 2.19 . . . 113 | 11. 17 129,142,148, 238 2.25 . 465,198,194] 11.21. . . 114! 11. 28, ‘ . 144 2 PETER II. 32 . . . 237 TiTus Il. 33. . . 1161. . . 84 II. 34. . . 116[1.9 .- . . 171 111. . 171 | 11.35. . 224,281] 1.10 . . . 191 1.12. 88, 288 | 12. 7 . ς. 82)1.12 - . . 280 2. 2-10 . 179 | 12,15 . . 178 {1.18 . . . 222 2.132 . . 84 12. 23. . 124,2ω00] 1.19 . 47, 169, 228 38 . . . 207| 132.5 . . . 182/2.5 ..... . 97 1,6, . . Ι60 2.14 . . 47, 74 1.9... - . 125 | 2.22 . 155, 156, 288 PHILEMON 13. 24 . . . 237 !3.16 . ° - 88 20. . . 195 JAMES 1 JoHN HEBREWS Ir. . . 179|]|1.3 ε . . 143 11. . . 18δ] 1.9 . . 210 I. . . 107| 1.13. . . 74|2.19 . 148, 201 2.10 . . . 106] 1.24. 185, 189, 144 | 2. 24 . . [69 2.15. . . 215/21. . . 125 [4:1 . . 125 3.5 . . . 1612.25 . . . 280; 4.2 . 229 3. 8, 15 . 124/3.4 . . . 280 | 4.3 . 171 3.12 . 74, 178, 193 | 3. 13 . 93 | 4. 16 . . 68 3.16 . . . 86θ6᾽ 4. 2f. : . 160/5.3 . . 211 41. . . 185] 5.16 . . 156/ 5.10 . . . 171 4.3 - . . 280] 5.17 . . . 217 τ: κ τ΄. . 160, 168 4.7 - . . 124 | 5.Ι. . 218 5. . . . 102 1 PETER 2 JOHN 6.4f. . . . 66 , 6.6 . . . 280[:1.2.ὃ . . . 82| . . . 229 6.10 . . 204, 210) 1.8 . 281, 232 8 .. - 650, 116 γι. . . 224] τ. τοί . . 115 | 10 . © :.. 125 7.2 - ° . 224) 1. "4 . 181 . . . . ϑ| 1.1. . . 84 ΕΝ 135 ὃ JouN 7-9 - . . 204/2,10 . . . 291 4. . 236 7.13 . . 148 12.11 . . 91,181! ἡ. . . 116 7.24 . . . 212/2.12 . . 181,182; 6 . . 228
INDEX TO QUOTATIONS.
JUDE
PAGE
I . 103 5. . . 280
REVELATION
1.4 . . 9 I. 5 . 9, 12 1. 16 . 36 I. 20 . 9 2.2 . . 56 2.3,5.- . . 52 2.4 . . . 52 2. 5, τό . . 78 2.7 ° - 85 2. 13 . . 12 2. 26 . 69 2. 27 . 145 3. 2 . . 114 3.3 63, 148, 145 3-5 . . 104 38 =~. ~  » 287 3.15 .- . . 200
nued
REVELATION—contt PAGE 3.16 . . . 114 44 . . . 386 4-9 . . 168 5.5... . 125 5.7 . 148, 145 6.6 . . 12ὅ 7.1. . . 86 7.2 . . 287 7.3» . . 12ὅ 7.9 ~~ . . 237 7.14 « . . 145 8.1 . . 168 8. 4 . . 768 8.5 . 148, 145 96. . . 190 9.11. 69, 288, 235 9. 12 . . 58 9. 14 . 86 9. 20 . 210 10. 2 . . 225 10. 4 . 125 10. 10 111, 115 11. 5 . 187 II. 17 52, 145
(6) OLD TESTAMENT.
REVELATION— continued
PAGE 1r.18 . 118 12. 4 114 12. 6 . . δ9 12. 7 106, 217, 218 12. 9 . . 283 13.812. . 237 14. 4 . . 168 14. 8 . . 185 14. 13 . 114, 248 14. 20 . . 102 17. 3 . . 65 18. 2 134, 135 18. 14 190, 192 18, 22 . . . 192 19. 3 145 19. 10 178 20. 2 233 20. 4 130 20. 8 237 21. 12, 14 225 21. 13 73 21. 21 105 21. 27 . . 24] 22. 9 178
N.B.—The numbering of the chapters is according to the English Bible ; where the LXX differs, the numbers are added in brackets... So with titles of
Books.
PAGE Gen. 1.10 . . 46 » 3-10 . 16 ,»,» 424. . 98 »» 6.17 49 » 8.13 287 »,» 21. 26 . 241 ,»» 24.11 162 , 43. 16 . 68 ,,γ(͵ 43. 23 . 240 » 45.8 . 94 Ex.1.16  . . 54 » 3. 14 . 228 ,.,ς 32.1 142 Num. 11. 29 194 Deut. 23.1 . 163 », 28. 24 ff. 194 Jos. 1.11. 70 ,»» 17.33 76 Judg. 9. 29 194 » 9 5 . 112 Ruthi.9 . . 194
PAGE
1Sam.(1K.)1.11 191 » 9.9. 235
1» «= «132. 5 . +14
2 Sam. (2 K.) 18. 33 194 9» 20. 20 . 240
»» 21. 24 50
1 Chr. 11. 19 240 Job 22ὥ.23 . . 168 » 24.12 . . 88 »» 3020 . 147 9» 31. 31 198 .,Ὼκ 31. 35 194 Ps. 6. 9 . 174 »» 32 (31). 3 147 », 120 (119). 3 194 59 141 (140). I 147 Prov. 3.5 - . 226 9» 9.12. 88, 89 » 227. 88 ,»» 27.15. 88 Eccles, 2. 16. 70
Ca. 8. 1 . Isai. 5. 27
» 14.31 . » 28.16. » 33:24. » 53-5 Jer.
9. 2 . »,» 31 (38). 33 Ezek. 26. 13.
Dan. Io, 13, 20
Hos. 11.1 . .
APOCRYPHA
Esth. 13.3 .
2 Mac. 3. 16
» Qe 24.
» [12.4 . 4 Mac. 5. 13 .
258 INDEX TO QUOTATIONS.
(c) INSCRIPTIONS.
Archiv Archiv fir Papyrusforschung, ed. Ὁ. Wilcken. PAGE PAGE PAGE iii, 129 ~ « 14 Audollent
Defixionum Tabellae, ed. Audollent (Paris, 1904). n.1§. . . 24]no92. © «© 195 | no. 189. . . 234
BCH Bulletin de Correspondance Hellénique. . 1888, p. 202. . 284 | 1902, p. 217. . 196 | 1903, p. 335. . 234
Cauer
Delectus inscriptionum Graecarum, propter dialectum memorabilium?, ed. P. Cauer (Leipzig, 1883).
no. 32 . . . 214 | no. 157. . . 214 | no. 220. ‘ . 214
47. . . 214 171. . . 214 264. . 178, 214 122-5. . 214 179. ° . 214 431. ° . 214 148 . . 214
Cooke
North Semitic Inscriptions, by G. A. Cooke (Oxford, 1908). no. 110. . . 236 | no. 113. . . 236
IMA Inscriptiones Maris Aegaci, ed. von Gartringen and Paton. iii, 174. . . 167 | iii. 325. . . 100 | ili. 1119 . . 51
JHS Journal of Hellenic Studies (Hellenic Society).
XIX. 92. . . 86 | xxii. 369 . 7, 220 xix. 299 . . 93 | xxiil. 85 . . 240
xxv. 63. . . 239


Letronne Reevetl des inscriptions grecques et latines de l’ Egypte, ed. Letronne (1842).
no. 117. . 159 | no. 198. . . 102 | no. 557. . . 240 149. . . 60 221. , . 240 | vol. ii. p. 286 . 240 190. . . 102 |

Magn. Die Inschriften von Magnesia am Macander, ed. O. Kern (Berlin, 1900). no. 47 - . . 62] no. 114. . . 64] no. 215. . . 198
Michel Recueil d’inscriptions grecques, ed. C. Michel (Brussels, 1900). no. 32 . . . 647] no. 357. . .’ 214 | no. 694. 46, 101, 214 . 8
41. 2 470. . . 216 1001 . 101, 214 54-6 . . 214 417. . . 214 1333 . . 214 60 . . . 214 430. . . 214 1409 . . 55 182. . 214 585. . . 88 1411 . . 55
199. . «© 214 |
INDEX TO QUOTATIONS. 259
OGIS Orientis Graecit Inscriptiones Selectae, ed. Dittenberger (Leipzig, 1903-5). PAGE PAGE PAGE no. 17 . . . 64] no. 56. . . 78 | No. 219. . . 238 41 . . . 216 87 . . . 64 383. : . 21] 54 - . . 105 90 (Rosetta) . 102, 435. . 101 167, 216
Ramsay, C. and Β. Cities nt Bishoprics of Phrygia, by W. M. Ramsay, 2 vols. (Oxford, 1895, 1897). ) ii. 380 . . . 289 | ii. 472 . . . 240 / ii. 535-8 . . 240
291. . . 239 477 . . . 239 527. . . 284 2092. . . 240 485 . . . 238 559f. . . 240 394. . . 289 520. . . 289 δός. . . 56
Roberts-Gardner
Introduction to Greck Epigraphy, vol. ii., The Inscriptions of Attica; ed. E. 8. Roberts and E. A. Gardner (Cambridge, 1905).
Ρ. 179 - . . 212 | p. 258(no.97) . 234
Viereck SG
Sermo Graecus quo Senatus Populusque Romanus... ust sunt, by P. Viereck (Gottingen, 1888
pp. 12, 13, 21 . 101
(4) Papyrt.
Archiv (see under (6) above) iii, 60 . . . 17 | ii. 173. . . 286
ΒΜ British Museum Papyri, ed. F. α. Kenyon (London, 1893, 1898). Vol. i. nos, 1-138.
no. 18 . . . δῶ! πο.22. . . 220|γο.42. . . 240 20. . . 167 41. . . 62 130. . . 236 21. . 190, 208

Vol. ii. nos. 139 ff.
no. 177. . . 296 220. . . 234 233. . _» 169
BU Griechische Urkunden, from the Berlin Museum.
Vol. i. nos, 1-861 (1895). no. 18 . . . 220 | no. 114. . . 289 no. 225. . . 234
no. 239. . . 98 201. . . 195 336. . . 80
no. 401. . . 239 417. . . 70 970. . . 17


27. . . 86 136. . . 146 226. . . 220 21. . - 60 I51. . . 229 243. . . 220 46. . . 220 163. . . 144 297. . . 248 46. . . 220 164. . . 220 | 303. . . 240 48 . : . 179 183. . . 227 221. . . 220 69 . . . 78 195. . . 220 326. 59, 109, 187 98 . . . 280 197. . . 177 361. . . 231

260 INDEX TO QUOTATIONS.
BU—conttnued. Vol. ij. nos, 362-696 (1898). PAGE PAGE PAGE no. 362. ° « 14{ no. 457. : . 220 | no. 607. . 3806, 168 266. . . 84 531. . . 208 623. 96 168. . . 84 537. . . 284 625. 177, 208, 220 371. . . 84 546. . . 168 632. . 159 395- . . 84 577. . . 60 651. . . 220 424. . . 168 592. . . 101 665. . 219, 236 449. . . 86 595. . . 220 Vol. iii. nos. 697-1012 (1903). no. 731. . . 220 | no. 830. . . 219 | no. 948. . 1 741. . . 196 836. . . 101 970 103, 159, 235, 236 747 « . . 220 845. . . 220 997. 775° . 160 887. . . 75 998 . . . 107 814. . 142, 171 925. . . 286 1002 . . 60 822. . . 926. . . δά °
Vol. iv. nos. 1018 ff. (in progress).
no. 1013 . . 60 | no. 1040 . 236 | no. 1052 . . 91
ΙΟῚ 5 . . 288 ΙΟΔῚ : . 78 1053 . 161 1031 . . 220 1044 . . 97 1055 . . 161 1033s . O51 1050 . - 108 1057 . - 80 1036 . - 60
Ch P
Greek Papyri from the Cairo Museum, ed. E. J. Goodspeed (Chicago, 1902). no. 3 . . . 162 | no.15 . . - 101
CPR Corpus Papyrorum Raineri, ed. C. Wessely (Vienna, 1895).
no.4 - . . 223 | no.25 . . . 169 | no. 156. ° . 220 I9 . . 212, 239 28 . . . 127 237. ° - 169 24. . 127, 169
Eudoxus Papyrus of the astronomer Eudoxus, ed. Blass . . . ὁ 78, 91
PFi
Florence Papyti, ed. Vitelli (Lincei Academy: fasc. i., Milan, 1905). no. 2 . . 220 | no.5 . . . 106 | no. 24. . - ὅ8 HIP
- Heidelberg Papyri (mainly LXX), ed. G. A. Deissmann (1905). no. 6 e e . 196
KP Papyri from Karanis, ed. E. J. Goodspeed (Chicago, 1900). no.37 - «© .. 60 |no.46. . . 72
LP Papyri Graecci Muset antiquartt publict Lugduni- Batavi, ed. C. Leemans (1843). Be. . . 195,220 |E. . . . 159|U. .  . 60, 237 C. . « ©. 50|{G. . - « 45, W 79, 195, 197, 245

INDEX TO QUOTATIONS. 261
MP Papyri from Magdola, in BCH 1902 ff., ed. Lefebvre. PAGE PAGE PAGE no. 16 . . . 105 | no.20. . . 105 | no. 25 . 100, 239
Mithras Liturgy
Hine Mithrasliturgie, by A. Dieterich (Leipzig, 1908). Ρ. 12 . . . δά|ρ.17 .- . . 40 NP
Geneva Papyri, ed. J. Nicole, 2 vols. (1896, 1900). no.I . . . 229| no.I9 . . . 142 | no.
53 7. . . 208 47. . . 101 67 . 80 16. . . 220 4. «  « 228 69 . 80 17 . . . 198 51 . . . 188 Par P Paris Papyri, in Notices et Eectraits, xviii. part 2, ed. Brunet de Presle (1865). no.5 . . . 228 no. 26 . 60, 167, 168 | no. 46 . . . 167 8. . . 226 28. . - 62 48 . . . 6, 53 Io . . . 284 35 . . 172 49. 17, 108, 198, 13. . . 231 26. . . 107 205 14. . . 281 27. . . 172 51. 85, 121, 208 IS . 59, 73, 240 40. . 86, 231 60 . . 46, 84, 93 8 . . 12, 168 42. . . 179 62. - 46,168 | 22. 60, 62, 110 44. . . 229 63 . 14, 61, 198, 228 Path P
Papyri from Pathyris, in Archiv ii. 514 ff., ed. de Ricci. no.I 2. « «+ 228 |
PP
Flinders Petrie Papyri, ed. J. P. Mahaffy (in Proc. Royal Irish Academy, Cunningham Memoirs, viii., 1891).
no. 13 . . . 168
ΤΡ Turin Papyri, ed. Peyron (1826).
no.1 . 75,108,197, | no.3 . . . 281 | no 8
-  « 281, 287 229, 231, 246 rs
The following collections are (with one exception) from the publications of
the Egypt Exploration Fund; the papyri were discovered and mainly edited by B. P. Grenfell and A. S. Hunt :—
RL Revenue Laws of Ptolemy Philadelphus (Oxford, 1896). col. 29. . . 93] col. 38. . - 108
α
An Alexandrian Erotic Fragment, and other Greek Papyri, chiefly Ptolemate (1896).
no. 18 . . . 284|ο.2320. . . 223 | no. 35 . . . 223
262


Tebtunis Papyri (University of California Publications), 162 | no.
no. 6 . 128, 169 | no. 35 . 12. 108, 223, 234 38 13. . . 1381 41 14 99, 228 42 24. 79 43 26. . 86 50 27. . 103 bis 58 28 169 59 33 78 62
34. . 281, 232 63 .
GH Greek Papyri, series II. (1897). PAGE — PAGE no. 15 . . . 84] no. 36. 106, 159 26. . 91, 223 48. . 169 ΟΡ Oxyrhynchus Papyrt. Vol. i. nos. 1-207 (1898). no6 . . . 1,ἯΟ, no.67. 204 34. . . 169 69 . 220 4. . . 106 γι. 199 όο. . . 199 82. . 220 86 . . . 220 Vol. ii. nos. 208-400 (1899). no. 237. 168, 197, 218, | no. 265. . 64 220, 240 . 266. 239 240. 195 275. . 220 261. 106 285. 220 Vol. iii. nos. 401-658 (1903). no. 413. 175 | no. 486. . . 99 471. 231 488 . 104 477. 68, 141 491. 231 478. 146 492. . . 101 482. 142 496. . 159, 187 Vol. iv. nos. 654-839 (1904). no. 654. 180 | no. 717. . . 12] 658. . 99 724. . . 108 708 . . . 105 725. . . 228 715. . . 19ὅ γ26. 106, 231 716. . . 78 727. 230, 231 FP Faydm Towns and their Papyri (1900). no. 109. 160 | no. 118. 101 110. . 162 121. 131 112. 128, 178, 228 122. . . 101 ΑΡ Amherst Papyrt, part ii (1901). no. 30 . . 97, 238 | no. 93 . . . 168 "ὃ. . 928, 231 113. . . 60 86 . . . 179 130. . . 86 TbP
86, 168, 223
223, 234 . . 235 . . 97
INDEX TO QUOTATIONS.
no.
no.
no.
no.
no.
no.
no.
PAGE 46 . . 48 99 . . 84 105. 169 113. 160 119. 28, 64, 240 121. 97, 208 286. 281 292. 54, 79 295. 123, 156 299. . 8 523. . 103 526 195, 200, 210 527. . 60 528 99, 142, 234 530 132, 200 736. . 170, 216 738. . 170 γ44. . 123, 208 745. . 2 1 SII . . 64
124. . . 28 126. 168 130 . . 169
135 17, 77, 208, “66 144. . . 240
part i. (1902).
64 . 2385 6 . 107 72 - 108, 236 82 . . 235 98 . . . 235 104 . 64, 241 105 "79, 234, 235, 246 107. . . 234 124. 235 230. . . 42
i. Classical. Homer (? x/viii 8.0.) PAGE Iliadi. τ. . 172 | Llad vi. 284. . i. 137- . 166, 239 vi. 459 . , Pindar (v/B.C.) Pyth. iv. 189 132
Aeschylus (v/5.c.) Prom. Vinel. 447 f.
Sophocles (v/8.c.) Antigone 114 542 . 789 . . Oedipus Coloneus
155
Euripides (v/s.c.) Alcestis 386 Bacchae 1065 Hecuba 1163
Aristophanes (v/B.c. Acharn. 484 . Pax 291
INDEX TO QUOTATIONS.
(6) GREEK LITERATURE.
76 | Prom. Vincet. 956f.
74 | Oedipus Tyrannus

93 236 202 | 533 706 Φ e
179 1141 . . 134 | Jon 771 . 115 | Lphig. in Taur 118 1092 . . 3
227 | Ranae 521 . . 161 618-622
rlippocrates (v/B.c.)
Epidem. vii. 51 .
Herodotus (v/z.0. ) Vi. 32 . Antiphon (v/a Cc.) Frag. M. 3. 67 . Thucydides (v/. σ. oo iv. 54 . [Xenophon] (ν[8.0.} De Republ. Athen. 113. . Xenophon (iv/B. σ. ) Hellenica τ. vi. 4 Plato (ἰν|Β.6.)}
Alcibiades 124A 146, 238
Apologia, 183 20E 21A
101 81} vii 46... «©
227
31
247 | 111. 11,14. .
Apologia, 2865 . 202 νος 122 122
39A . Crito 52A
44A . . . Euthydemus 2768.
Demosthenes (iv/B.c.)
Aristocrates 659
[Demosthenes] (ἢ) Aristogeiton 597
Aristotle (iv/s.c. ) Poetics 19 .
177 | Meidias 525 - .
76
PAGE
134 185
262
PAGR
Itiad xxii. 349 98
Odyssey i. 337 55
184 | Persaeg8t . . 97 Oedipus Tyrannus
1199. . . 84
Philoctetes 300 178
70 247
101
212
142 192
71 141 229
186
Fris, frag. 201 (Din-

dorf) . . . 97
Iphig.in Taur.1359 58 Medea 213 f. . . 135
1320. 177 Thesmophor. 1108. 188 Aves 1534 247 Euthyphroi4eE . 98 Theaetetus 144B 144 Protagoras 312A . 192 Republic i. 3378 . 177
264 INDEX TO QUOTATIONS.
il. Hellenistie. [For the main writers in this section see also Index III.]
Polybius (ii/B.c.) PAGE PAGE 50. 7. . . 85 | 516. 30 ° . 207 | 1004
Cicero (i/B.c.) Ad Atticum vi. καὶ (a Greek sen- tence) . . 178 f.
Dionysius Halicarnassensis (i/B.C. ) x. IO. 65
Philo Judzus aa D.) De FPosteritate Caint,§ 145 . 100
Flavius Josephus (i/a.p.)
Antiqu.i. 1.1. 237 | Antig. xx. 8.6 . 235 | Contra Apionem
vii. 9. 2. . 285 | Bell. ii. 13. 5 . 235 4. 21. ° Dionysius Thrax (i/A.D.) 154
Plutarch (i/a.pD.)
p.256D . . 216] p. 6088... . 246|p.767.  .
[Barnabas] (i/A.D.) ii. 28 . 7174|ν.13 2 . . 210
Clement of Rome C/A D.) ad Cor. 17. . 8 | ad Cor. 21 . . 95
Justin Martyr (ii/a.p.) Apology i. 22, 32, 44, 60, 62,ii.2 148 Arrian (ii/a.p.) Epictetus ii. 2.16 210 Lucian (ii/A.D.) Dialogi Marini, Piscator6 . . 144 iv.3  . 76, 87 Ascensio Isaine (ii/A.D.) Ι2 - . 9
Aquila ἫΝ
Gen. 1. . 18
Clement of Alexandria (ii/A.D.) Paedagogus iii. 1 198 [Clement] (iii/a.p. ὃ) Homilies iii. 69. 177 | Homiliesxv.8 . 86
John Chrysostom (ΙΑ. D.) ix. 2505 . 229
Isocrates (Argument to—vi/A.D.) Busiris . 212
PAGR 247
146
INDEX TO QUOTATIONS. 265
Apocrypha in Preuschen’s Antilegomena (edd. 1) PAGE PAGE PAGE Gosp. acc. to He- Ebionite Gospel, Gospel of Peter 35 brews, no. 4 no.2b(p.9) . 17 (p. τ) . . (p. 4). 17 in Tischendorf’s Acta Apostolorum Apocrypha Acts of Philip 36 (Ρ. 92) . .- 11, Modern. Abbott Songs of Modern Greece, by G. F. Abbott (Cambridge, 1900) p. 22, 26 . 121 [ p.7o . . . 12] p. 222. . . 119 42. . 85,170 128f, . . 102 224. . . 162 44 . 106, 121 184. . . 91 228. . . 157
5:5... . 88 200. . . 189
Pallis (see p. 80 n?.) title . . . 102 | Mt 22 . Lk 20'S, : . 240 Mtir . . 1] Lk6®. . . 282 | Jn 107%, . . 282
e
wo oo bo
(f) Latin.
Cicero
Pro Archia 22. 242 Vergil
Eclogues vii. 16. 218 Livy
Ix. I. . . 58
jJuvenal lil. 60f. . 5
Il. INDEX OF GREEK WORDS AND FORMS.
--...η.-.--.-.-.
a for αὖ 47
ἀββά 10, 238
αἰτεῖν uses of act. and mid. 160
ἀκατάπαστος 47, 74
ἀκούειν : 6. ἀκοῇ 14, 75—c. ace. and gen. 66, 245
ἀλλά 241
ἀμφί disappearance of, 100
ἀμφότερος supplants ἄμφω 57—of more than two 80 .
ἄν : for ἐάν 43, 167, 240—history 165 f. —statistics for NT and LXX 166f. —iterative 167—ws ἄν 167—weaken- ing in conditions 167, 198, 200— ὅταν etc. 6. indic. 168—dropped from compounds 168 f.—el μήτι ἄν 169, 239 —dropped with ἔδει εἰ sim. 200— denoting unrealised condition 200 f.
«αν : in 2nd aor. 51—in impf. and perf. 52
“ἂν in inf. 53
ἀνά 100, 105—dvd μέσον 99, 100
ἀνάθεμα 46
ἀντί 100—c. inf. 81
Avriwas flexion of, 12
ἀπεκατεστάθην double augm. 51
ἀπελπίζειν c. acc. 65
ἀπάγχεσθαι reflexive use of mid. 155
ἀπό : c. nom. (ὁ ὦν) 9, 12—in composi- tion 65, 112—with adverbs 99— enlargement of use 102, 237, 246
ἀπογράφεσθαι mid. or pass. 162
ἀποκρίνεσθαι : aorist 39, 161—droxpibels εἶπε etc. Hebraic 14—coincident or antecedent partic. 131
ἀποστερεῖσθαι mid. or pass. 162
ἁρπάζειν perfective of, 113
-dpxns and -apxos nouns in, 48
ἄρχεσθαι superfluous, from Aramaic
«ἂσαι in 2 sg. pres. mid. 53 f.
ἀσπασάμενος action of 132, 238
αὐτός : replacing ἐκεῖνος 86 — with article, weakening of, 91 — αὐτοῦ gen. of place 73
ἄφες 175 f.
ἀφέωνται 38—relation to ἀφίενται 119
Βάαλ gender of, 59 βάλλειν et sim. differentiation of tenses 109---ἐβλήθη as timeless aor. 134
γεύεσθαι c. gen. and ace. 66, 245
γίνεσθαι : Hebraism 14, 16 f.—éyévero with indicative 16 f.—with καί and indicative 16 f.—with infinitive 16 f. —orthography 47—part. -yevduevos 51—with eis 71—original action of present 109 --- γίνεται with futural sense 120—yéyova aoristic? 145 f., 238, 239—ph γένοιτο 194, 240, 249
γινώσκειν : orthography 47—action of tenses 118, 148--’γνοῖ 55, 196---γνώῃ 193
διά 104~-106—in composition 112 f. διδόναι : forms after -w and.-dw verbs 55 —6ot 55, 196—dw7 55, 198 f., 196
δύο 57, 96, 97
ἐάν: for ἄν 42f., 49, 166, 186, 284— c. indic. 168—replaced by el... ἄν in illiterate Greek 169, 239—relations with εἰ 187, 240—replaced by parti- cipial clause 229 f,
ἑαυτούς reciprocal 87, 246—éavrod and ἴδιος 87-89 —avr@ c. act. instead of mid. 157
ἐγείρειν with εἰς 71 f.—differentiation of perfect and aorist 137, 141—voices 163
ἐδέετο 54
el; subj. with εἰ μήτι dy 169, 239— relation to ἐάν 187, 240—c. subj. 187, 289—expr. a wish 196—c. opt. 196—el οὐ c. ind. 200, 240
el μήν 46
εἶδον 111, 116 ἢ, 188---ἰδού 11, ἴδον 47. See ὁρᾶν
εἰμί : flexion of, 55 f.—imperative 180, 226—in periphrasis 225-227
εἶμι 120
“εἰν in pluperfect 53
εἶπον 111—elroica and efraca 131
eis: With ἀπάντησιν 14—encroaches on
266
INDEX OF GREEK WORDS AND FORMS.
ἐν 62 f., 66, 234 f. forming predicate 71f.—«. inf. 81—els réc. inf. 218-220
εἷς : as ordinal 95 f., 237—as indef. art. 96 f.—o els 97---κ.ατὰ and ἀνὰ els 105
ἐκ 99, 102, 237 forming perfective 237
ἐλαιών 49, 69, 235
ἔλεος 60
ἐμός for μου 40, 211
ἐν: instrumental 12, 61, 104— with rq and inf. 14, 215—of time 16—statistics 62—relations with els 62, 66, 67, 234 f.—in anarthrous pre- positional phrases 82, 236—ymiscel- aneous uses 103 f.
ἐνεδρεύειν 6. acc, and dat. 64
ἐνεργεῖν : ὁ. acc. 65—voices 156
ἔνοχος 6. gen. 39
ἐπί: with three cases 63, 107 — with adverbs 99—perfective 113
ἐπιβαλών 131
ἐπιγινώσκειν 118
ἐπιθυμεῖν c. acc. and gen. 65
ἐξόν acc. abs. 74
ἕξω contr. with σχήσω 150
épauvay 46
ἐργάζεσθαι and its perfective 113
-es acc. in, 36, 37
-es in perf. and 1st aor. 52
«εσαι in fut. mid. 54
ἐσθίειν : why defective 111—its perfec- tive with κατά 111, 116
ἕτερος for ἄλλος 79 f., 246
εὐδοκεῖν ὁ. acc. β4---εὐδόκησα 184
εὐοδῶται 54
ἔχειν, σχεῖν : action of, 110, 145 — ἔσχηκα aoristic ὃ 145, 248—future 150
ἕως with ὅτον 91---ο. subj. without ἄν 168 f.
F 28, 38, 44, 47, 111, 244 Ζμύρνα 45
ἡλίκος 98
ἥκασι 53
ἡμεῖς for ἐγώ 86, 246 ἢ μήν 46
ἤμην 56
(Ὁ) subj. 49, 168 ἠνοίγην 56
ἥτω 56
ἦχος 60
θαυμάσαι act. and pass. signification 203
θέλειν : foll. by subj. 185
θεός and θεά 60, 244
-θὴν aor. forms in, 161
θνήσκειν and its perfective 112—sim- plex obsolete except in perfect 114— action of present and aorist stem 114
θυγάτηρ as voc. 71
267
εὐ irrational final 49
ἴδιος relation to ἑαυτοῦ 87-90, 237, 246—6 ἴδιος 90 f.
ἰδού ““ Hebraic” use of, 11
Ιεροσόλυμα fem. and neut, 48, 244
᾿Ιησοῦς flexion of, 49
ἱκανός in Latinisms 20
ἵνα : 6. fut. 35—enlarged sphere in Western Greek 41, 205, 211—c. subj. for imperative 176, 178 f. — 6. opt. in ‘wish’ clause 196—re- lations with infin. 205, 240 f. — ecbatic use 206-209—after ποιῶ and θέλω 208, 248—consecutive 210
«κα aoristic perfects in, 145, 288, 248
καθαρός foll. by ἀπό 102
καί in place of hypotaxis 12
κατά 44, 104f.—combinations with, 99—in composition 111 ff.
καταλαμβάνειν act. and mid. 158
κλείς acc. of, 49
κρατεῖν 6. acc. and gen. 65, 235
κράτιστος as ἃ title 78
λήμψομαι 56:
λιμός doubtful gender 60 λοιποῦ gen. of time 73 λούεσθαι 155 f., 238 Λύστρα dec}. of, 48
μανθάνειν c. part. or inf. 229
μείζων : flexion of, 49, 50—used as superlative 78
pera 104-106—in translation 106, 246 —alleged Semitism with πολεμεῖν 106
μή : use of οὐ μή 35, 187-192—in pres. and aor. prohibitions 122-126, 178, 188—el μήτι ἄν 169, 239—od normal 6. indic., μή with the moods 170, 239 — uses with indic. 170f.—in questions 170, 239—el μή 171, 187, 239— in relative sentences 171, 289 f. —tri μή 171, 239—not used with aor. imper. 2nd pers. 173—but with 3rd pers. 174—with future 177, 240 —in warning 178, 184---ἶνα μή in command 178f.—c. partic. impera- tival 180—in cautious assertion 192- 194— ph γένοιτο 194,240, 249—e. opt. 196—c. indic. irreal. 200—c. partic. in close connexion with οὐ 232— c. infin. after verba cog. et dic. 239 —c. partic. in orat. obf. 289---ἐπεὶ μή 240—ph ὅτι γε, μήτιγε 240
«με verbs in, invaded by -w forms 55, 56
-v: irrational final 49—added to 3rd decl. acc. sing. 49
νοῦς flexion in 8rd decl. 48
Νύμφδν 48
268
οἷδα : flexion of, 55, 245—relation to εἶδον 109—c. partic. or inf. 229
-o in infin. 53
olos double use of, 93
ὄλλυσθαι aor. and perf. 147
ὁμολογεῖν : with ἐν 104—with part. or acc. and inf. 229.
ὀναίμην 195
ὁποῖος double use of, 93
ὅπου with ἄν 168
ὁρᾶν: why defective 110f.—action ofaor. 117—in warnings 178
-ocav in imperf. and 2nd aor. 52
8s: used for ὅστις 92—attraction 93 —replaced by τίς 93—reinforced with demonstrative 94 f., 237
ὅστις limited use of, 91, 92—ws ὅτον 91
ὅσος double use of, 98
ὅταν : 6. indic. 168, 239—c. aor. and pres. subj. 186
ὅτι : used for τί 94—c. finite verb re- placing acc. and inf. 211
οὐ : use of οὐ μή 89, 187-192—relation to μή 169-171 — with fut. in pro- hibitions 177—<c. partic. 231 f.—e ov and ἄν μή in illiterate Κοινή 240
«οὔσθε and -oire subj. 54
ὄφελον 200 f.
ὀψέ with gen. 72, 78
παρά 106, 247
πατήρ : as voc. 71—anarthrous use 82 f.
πείθειν : differentiation of tenses 147— act. and mid. 158
πεῖν 45
περί 104 f.
πιστεύειν constructions with, 67 f., 235
πλείω (ef sim.) as indecl. 50
πλήρης indecl. 50, 244
πλοῦτος 60
ποίας gen. of place 78
ποιεῖν with noun, instead of middle, 159—xadds ποιεῖν with aor. part 228
τοῖος 95
πολεμεῖν : cases 64—with μετά 106, 247
ποταπός 95
ποῦ gen. of place 73
wplvy 100, 169
wpé 100, 101
πρός statistics 63, 106---πρὸς τό c. inf. 218-220
προσέχειν ο. dat. 157
προσκυνεῖν 6. dat. and acc, 64, 66, 245
προσφωνεῖν c. acc, and dat. 65
πρόσωπον in ‘‘ Hebraic” locution 14, 99
INDEX OF GREEK WORDS AND FORMS.
πρῶτος c. gen. 79—as ordinal partly replaced by els 95 f., 237
-p&% nouns in, 38, 48
«σαν 8rd pl. in, 83, 37
«σθωσαν in imper. 53
στόμα in ‘‘ Hebraic” locutions 99
σύν : relation to μετά 106—perfective 113, 148
συνεργεῖν c. acc. 65
συνετὸς 222
συνπαραλαμβάνειν tenses 180, 133
σῴζεσθαι tenses 127
differentiation of
1 σωτήρ 84
τελεῖν tenses 180
τέσσαρες: acc. 33, 36, 55—orthography 45 f.
τεσσαράκοντα 45 f.
τηρεῖν and perfective 113
τίκτειν differentiation of tenses 126
rls used as relative 93
τις supplanted by εἷς 97 f.
«τος verbal adj. in, 221 f.
τοῦ c. inf. 216-220
τυγχάνειν oc. partic. 228---τυχόν 8.36. abs. 74
“«Ττωσαν in imper. 58
-via, flexion of partic. in, 38, 48
ὑπέρ 104f., 237
ὑπό ο. dat. 68, 105—with adverb 99— replaced by ἀπό for agent 102 -- statistics 104 f.—compared with διά 106—after ἀποθνήσκειν 156
ὑποτάσσεσθαι mid. or pass, 167
φαγεῖν. See ἐσθίειν
φέρω: why defective 110—aoristic use of present stem 129, 238, 247
φεύγειν differentiation of tenses 112, 115 ἢ
χάρις acc. of, 49
χείρ in ‘* Hebraic” locutions 99 χεῖραν ef sim. 49
χρᾶσθαι cases with, 64, 245
ὦ use in classical and Hellenistic Greek 71
ὥραν for point of time 63, 245
ws with ἄν 167—with ὅτε 212
wore change of signification 207—con- secutive 209 f.
INDEX OF GREEK WORDS AND FORMS.
dy if. e ° Φ Φ
ἀπὸ ο. acc. . ° ἀποκρίθηκα . .
ἄς -- ἄφες
-ἂς, gen. Gdos, nouns in αὐτός, Pontic ἀτός . .
dx (Epirot)=€ . : .
βάθρακος. . . . βρῆκα-ΞΞεὕρηκα. . .
γενάμενος. ° . γιὰ νά in order that . .
δαιμονίζω. ἢ . δέν = ovdév .
δένοντας indecl. pres. partic.
διά Cc. ace. . . .
ἐβάσταξα . . . ° ἐδέθηκα . εἰποῦμε 1. pl. subj. of εἶπα. ἔλεγε and εἶπε .
ἕνας -εεἷς. . . . ἔπαψα-Ξἔπαυσα. . . ἔρευνα . ἐστάθηκα, ἐστήθηκα ° ἐσύτεσύ . .
εὕρηκα . ἔφερα aor. of φέρνω-- φέρω . (ὀ᾿φέτο-Ξ ἐφ᾽ Eros . ἦρθαΞΞεἦλθα .
MopERN GREEK.
θά, θενά auxil. forming future 179, 185
ἔδιος. . . . “ἐς, oly nouns in. - 9
91
. 486, 244
καθείς, καθένας each . . καί, κι
κάμνω (aor. ἔκαμα) make Kay, . ἢ . .
pé=perad . . . .
μέρα = ἡμέρα μή(») 6. 5880]. . μὴ γένοιτο. νάτε ἵνα, sy .
ὀρνίχ Ξε ὄρνις (Pontic) . -οῦς gen. -οὔδος, nounsin . 6x (Epirot)=¢é . . .
παιδιά (pl. οὗ παιδί child) ᾽πῃ3ΞΞ εἴπῃς . . ποιός interrogative . πολεμῶ μέ.
ποῦ relative (indeclinable) .
σάν (=wWs ἄν) when, as . σαράντα (σεράντα) forty OTEKW=OTHKW , orhvw=lordvw .
ord(v) dat. of ὁ (=els τόν) ouvé Bnxe= συνέβη .
τετράδη Wednesday . ‘ φέρνω
χαίρομαι . χύννω (Cypriote)
PAGE 105 12 159 167
106 235
122, 170
194, 240, 249 157, 159, 176, 205
Il. INDEX OF SUBJECTS.
TE saan
N—see Sinaiticus
A—see Alexandrinus
Ablative case: lost in prehistoric Greek 61—as a part of the genitive 72— alleged Latinisms 101 f.
Ablaut 152
Absolute: genitive 12, 74, 236—accu- sative 74
Accent (stress): differentiating voices 152, 2838—distinguishing words 237
Accusative: and infinitive 16 f., 211 f., 229—pl. in -es 36—sg. in -» 49—3rd decl. and mixed 49—terminal 61— with prepositions, compared with dat. and gen. 62—with els, encroaching on ἐν c. dat. 62f., 234 f.—with other preps. supplanting dat. 63—for point of time 63—specification 63—en- croaching on other cases as object case with verbs—on dat. 64, 65—on gen. 64f., 235—with verbs formerly intransitive 65—internal or adverbial 65, 93—how far the old distinctions of cases still hold here 66—constr. of πιστεύω 67f., 285—with els re- placing a predicate 71 f.—absolute 74—substituted for nominative c. inf. 212—mixed with ὅτι construc- tion 213
Achaian-Dorian Κοινή 37
Action-form, verbal 108-118, 221 a/— see Aorist, Perfect, Present, Future ; Linear, Punetiliar, Perfective, Con- stative, Iterative, Ingressive, Effective.
Active Voice 152 ff.—see Middle
Acts: relations of first and second part 11, 216, 235—unity with Lk 14, 217 —the ‘‘We”-document 217—see Luke
Adjectives: pronominal 40, 79f., 87- 91—~§indeclinables 50 — ‘‘ Duality” 77f.— comparison 78f. — position, with article and noun 84—interjec- tional 181 f., 240—verbal 221 f.
Adverbs: prepositions κατά and dvd used as 105—in composition 112
Aelian 25, 79
Aeolic 37, 38, 44, 214—cf Lesbian
Aeschylus 215—see Index I (e), p. 263
Agent: ἀπό for urd expressing 102, 246
Agent-nouns 127
Agrapha 130, 171, 191
Ahikar, Story of 238 ἢ.
Aktionsart—see Action-form
Alkman 24
Alexander the Great 7, 30
Alexandrian Greek 40, 52
a-text 42, 53, 175, 176, 190, 225
Alexandrinus, Codex 86, 47, 54, 76, 191, 194, 240 ad
American RV 180
Amunonius 160
Anabasis, effect of the expedition on Greek dialects 31
Anacoluthon 58, 69, 95, 180, 223, 224, 225, 234
Analogy-formations 37, 38, 44, 48, 49, 51, 52, 58, 54, δῦ, 56
Anaphoric article 83
Anarthrous: infinitive with preposi- tions 81, 216 —prepositional phrases 81f., 236—nouns in ‘‘ headings” 82 —use of nouns with qualitative force 82 f.— proper names 83—adjective clauses 83f., 2386—infin., statistics 241
Aorist: subjunctive c. οὐ μή 35, 190— endings 51 f.—action-form 109-111, 118, 115-118, 129f., 182, 238— subjunctive, closely connected with fut. indic. 120, 149, 240—indicative, compared with imperfect 128 f.— participle 130-134, 238 — timeless uses 134—as past indefinite 134f., 135-140—expressing immediate past 134f., 189, 140—epistolary 185— gnomic 135—English rendering 135— 140—compared with perfect 141-146 —passive and middle 161 f.—subjune- tive after compounds of ἄν 166, 186 —no longer used with ἄν iterative 167—imperative, tone of 173, 189— 3rd person in prohibition 174 f.—con- trasted with imperatival pres. partic, 180—in unrealised condition, wish, or purpose 200 f.
270
INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 271
Aoristic: presents 119, 247--- φέρω 129, 238, 247—pertects 141-146, 238, 248
Apocalypse: grammatical level 9—use of cases and neglect of concord 9, 60 —bearing of grammar here on criti- cism 9f,—use of ἰδού 11—possible acc. pl. in -es 36, and sg. 3rd decl. in -αν 49—person-endings 52— nominative 69—prohibitions 124— aoristic perfects 145—od μή 191, 192 —rov c. inf. 217, 218—does not confuse els and ἐν in local sense 234 —small use of compound verbs 237
Apocrypha, RV of 198
Apotheosis 84
Appian: dative 63—optative 197
Aquila 18—see Index I (e), p. 264
' Aramaic: influences on Greek in NT 8, 13, 14, 15, 18, 75, 95, 103, 104, 124, 174, 189, 224, 226f., 230f., 235, 236, 240, 242—periphrastic imperfect 14, 226 f.—speech of Paul 7—of Jesus 8—of John 9—diction in Luke 14-18—ordinals 96—tenses 139 — participle 182 — periphrastic imperative 226 f.—see under Hebra- ism and Over-use
Arcadian 38
Archimedes 51
Aristophanes 215 —see Index I (6),
Ρ. 263
Arrian, optative in 197—see Index I (6), p. 264
Article: use by foreigners 21, 236 —general ‘‘correctness” of NT Greek 81—as relative and as de- monstrative 8l—dropped between preposition and infin. 81, 216— these three Ionic uses absent from NT 81l—alleged Hebraisms 81f., 236 —correlation 81 f.—anarthrous prepositional phrases 82, 236— dropped in sentences having the nature of headings 82—words spe- cially affecting anarthrous form 82 —qualitative force of anarthrous
words 82 f.—with proper names 83— |
used with the parent’s name in gen. 83, 236—with names of slaves and animals 88 --ὁ καὶ Παῦλος 838—col- loquial style drops art. before ad- jective adjuncts 83f., 236—mis- placement of adjective 84—roi θεοῦ καὶ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν, papyrus parallels 84—complex adjectival clause be- tween art. and noun 286
Articular Infinitive: ἐν τῷ in transla-
Greek 213, 215—for NT 218, 216— for Greek Bible 241—citations from dialect inscriptions 214—essentially literary, specially Attic 214 f.—use with dependent gen., as if a full noun 215—rod ὁ. inf., without pre- position, its original adnominal use 216—telic force in Thucydides and in NT 216—usage of the several NT writers in this respect 217—Paul’s tendency to drop telic force 217— parallelism with ἵνα 217—explana- tory infin. 218--- πρὸς τό and els τό, how far remaining telic 218 f.— papyrus citations for τοῦ, els τό, πρὸς τό 6. inf. 219 f.—belongs mainly to higher educational stratum 220.
Articular Nominative in address 70, 235
Articular Participle 126 f., 228
Asia Minor: characteristics of Greek 88, 40 f., 205, 211
Aspiration 44, 234, 236, 244
Assimilation of Cases: atter verbs of naming 69, 235—omitted with gen. abs. 74, 236
Asyndeton 181
Attendant Circumstances, participle of 230
Attic: literary supremacy 24— its earliest use in prose 25—grammar of inscriptions 29—Xenophon 31—lan- guage of the lower classes in Athens 31—the basis of literary Κοινή 32— how much did it contribute to the vernacular K ow ? 33 f., 214 f. nom. pl. used as accus. 87---κεκτῶμαι and μεμνῶμαι 54—xaréxea 55—revival of the dual 57—parenthetic nominative 70—use of vocative, divergent from Hellenistic 71—historic present 121 —the Orators, forms of prohibition 124, use of imperative 172—alleged ex. of aoristic perfect 146, 238— linear and punctiliar futures 150— active verbs with future middle 154 (.---ἀπεκρινάμην 161—optative in conditional sentences 196 f.—imper- fect in unfulfilled condition 201—- ὅπως and wa 206—ws ὅτι 212— articular infin. mainly due to Orators 213-215—nom. for acc. in long enumerations 234—see under the Attic writers’ names and in Index I (e), p. 256
Atticism 5, 22, 24f., 26, 170, 197, 206, 211, 239
tion 14, 215—bearing on history of | Attraction of Relative 92 f.
the Kowy 34, 213-215—rare anar- throus use with prepositions 81, 216 —appropriate to rhetoric 189, 213,
Augment 51, 128, 129 Authorised Version 98, 98, 112, 128 f., 136-140, 189
215—statistics for classical and later | Auxiliary ages 175 f.
272 INDEX OF
B—see Vaticanus
B-text 42, 53, 224—see under Stnatti- cus and Vaticanus
Bezae, Codex 16, 38, 42, 50, 55, 56, 58, 69, 78, 80, 94, 96, 107, 114, 124, 131, 161, 171, 228, 238, 235, 236, 240, 241, 242 al—see under 3-text
Biblical Greek, 2-5, 18, 99
Bilingualism: in Rome 5—illustrated from Wales 6f., 10 f.—in Egypt 6— in Lystra 7, 233—in Palestine 7 f., 289
Beeotian 33, 84, 55, 214
Bohairic 225
Brachylogy, with ἀλλά 241
Broken continuity, perfect of 144, 145, 148
Byzantine period 88, 96, 168, 197
Cappadocian—see Pontic
Cardinals: encroachment on ordinals 95f., 237 —simplification of the ‘teens’ 96—uses of els 96 f. —repeti- tion for distributive 97
Cases: in Rev 9—history 60-76, 284-- 236—with prepositions 100-107, 237 —see under the several Cases.
Catholic Epistles, use of compound verbs 237—-see under First Ep. of Peter, James, Second Ep. of Peter
Causal Participle 230
Cautious assertion 188, 192 f.
Chance in the Bible 219
Christians, ethics of average early 126, 238
Chrysostom, on ecbatic ἵνα 207—see Index I (e), p. 264
Clement of Rome 95—see Index I (e),
. 264
Colloquial—see under Vernacular
Common Greek: takes place of ‘‘ He- braic” in definition of NT Greek 1— 8 universal language 5f., 19—ma- terials for study 22 f.—literary Κοινή (q.v.)— papyri, inscriptions, MGr 27-30—unification of earlier Greek dialects 30—foreshadowings of this during v/iv B.c. 21—completed in time of Alexander 31 f.—decay of the old dialects 32—their relative con- tributions to the resultant Κοινή 32- 34, 36 f., 214 f.—pronunciation 34 f. how far was Kowy homogeneous ἢ 19, 38-41—dialects in (q.v.)
Comparison of adjectives and adverbs 77-79, 236
Complementary Infinitive 204
Compound Prepositions 99
Compound Verbs: cases with 65—per- fective action 111-118, 2837—-repeated without preposition 111, 115— statistics 237
SUBJECTS.
Conative action 125, 127, 128f., 147, 173 f., 186, 247
Concessive Participle 230
Concord 9, 28, 59f., 182, 244
Conditional Sentences: pluperfect in 148—apodosis with ἄν 166f., 196, 197-199, 200f.—éd» α. indic. 168, 187—el μήτι ἄν 169—el μή in unful- filled condition, ef οὐ in simple 171, 200, 240—futuristic subj. with ἐάν 185—its future-perfect sense in aor. 186—lessened difference between εἰ and ἐάν 187, 240—these almost ex- clusively confined to their proper moods 187—el 6. deliberative subj. 187—differentia of εἰ and ἐάν in future conditions 187—use of opta- tive 195, 196, 197 f. — unfulfilled conditions 199-201 — participle in protasis 229 f.
Conjugation-stems 109 f., 120
Conjunctions : with ὧν (ἐάν) 166, 234— ἀλλά ‘except ” 241
Conjunctive participle 230
Consecutive clauses: infinitive alone 204, 210 ---ὥὦστε with indic. and with infin. 209 f.—expressed by tva 210— by τοῦ c. infin. 218
Constative action 109, 111, 118, 115- 118, 180, 188, 145, 174.
Construct state (Semitic) 236
Contingent ἂν 166, 198, 200
Contract Verbs, 37, 52-54, 55, 234
Contraction of ¢ sounds 45, 55
Correlation of Article 81 f.
Cretan 214, 2833—see Gortyn
Criticism, contributions of grammar to 9f., 40f.
Culture—see Hducation
D—see Bezae
Dative: lost in MGr 60, 68—obso- lescent in Κοινή 62—decays through ἃ period of over-use, esp. with ἐν 62 —statistics with prepositions 62 f.— confusion of els and ἐν 68, 66, 234 ἢ. —decay of dative uses with ὑπό and πρός 683—with ἐπί, distinct meaning lost 63, 107—accus. begins to express point of time 63—reaction, as in ex- tension of dative (instrumental) of reference 63, 75, and in some transi- tive verbs taking dative 64—verbs beginning to take accus. or gen. instead of dat. 64—illiterate uses of gen. and acc, for dat. 64—some im- probable citations from early in- scriptions 64—with προσκυνεῖν 64, 66—with some compound verbs 65 —with πιστεύειν 67 f.—incommodi 75 —syncretism with locative 75, 104—with instrumental 75—exten-
INDEX OF
sion of time and point of time thus both given by dative 75—sociative instrumental 75—instrumental used in translating Hebrew infin. abs. 75 —this and use of participle com-
red with classical uses and with
XX 76—various uses of ἐν 103 f.— dat. of person judging 104—common uses of dat. and Foo. in Greek and Sanskrit 104—é» added even to in- strumental dative 104---ὁμολογεῖν ἐν 104—yperd, περί, ὑπό no longer c. dat. 105—one or two exceptions with ὑπό 105—mpés c. dat. common in LXX, rare in NT 106--- ἐπέ inditfer- ently with the three cases 107— ἐφ᾽ ᾧ 107—dative of reflexive ap- proximates to force of the Middle 157—xpa@cGa: with instrumental 158 —dat. or loc. of a verbal noun makes the Infinitive 202-204 — articular infin. (g.v.)
Days of week and month 96, 101, 237
De-aspiration—see Psilosis
Defective Verbs 110 f.
Definite nouns, in Semitic 236
Definition, gen. of 73 f.
Deliberative Subjunctive 171, 185, 187, 194
S-text 14, 44, 45, 53, 181, 238, 234— see under Bezae
Delphian, 36, 37, 52, 55, 214
Demonstrative: article as 81—avrés and éxetvos 91
Demosthenes 213—see Index I (e), p. 263
Denial and Prohibition, with οὐ μή 187 ἢ.
Deponents 153 f., 161 ἢ.
Dialects in ancient Hellas 23 f., 30-34, 36-38, 213f.—see under Attic, Ionic, etc.
Dialects in Κοινή 5f., 19, 28 f., 38-41, 47, 91, 94, 205, 209, 211, 241,248,249
Digamma 23, 38, 44, 47, 111, 244
Diodorus, optative in 197
Diphthongs: pronunciation 33, 34 f.— augment 51
Dissimilation 45
Distributive numerals 97
Doric 33, 45, 48, 51, 101, 214
Double comparative and superlative 236
Dual 57 f., 77 f.
Duality 77-80, 100
Durative action—see Linear
Dynamic Middle 158
Ecbatic ἵνα 206-209 Education, varieties of : in NT writers 8f., 28, 44, 50, 52, 60—in papyri, ete. 4, 6 f., 9, 28, 44, 47, 49, 50, 51, r8
SUBJECTS. 273
52—see under Jiliteracy ; also under Apocalypse, Mark, Luke, Paul, Hebrews, etc.
Effective action 109, 113, 180, 149
Eaypt, bilingualism in, 6, 242 tive 78, 79, 236
Elis, dialect of 178, 214
Elision 45
Ellipsis 178, 180, 181, 183, 190
Emphasis: in pronouns 85 f.—im- perfect and aorist differing in 128 pte cause of original voice- differentiation 152, 238—on subject, brought out by English preterite 140—degree of, in οὐ μή construc- tion 188-190—of od c. partic. 232 —differentiating words of full or attenuated meaning 237
English, Hellenistic illustrated from 19, 39, 58, 71, 77, 79, 82, 85, 89, 92, 94, 96, 98, 99, 111, 112, 135- 140, 144, 150 f., 171 f., 182, 184, 185, 189, 195, 208, 206, 218, 221 f., 229, 236, 243
Epexegetic infinitive 217, 218, 219
Epimenides 233
Epistolary aorist 135—formule 28, 176, 180
Euripides 215—see Index I (6), p. 263
“En austed’”’ éavrod and ἴδιος 87-90, 23
Final clauses : weakened telic force of ἵνα 178, 205-210, 240f., of τοῦ 6. infin, 207, 216-218, of εἰς τό c. infin., in Paul 219—originated in volitive, with parataxis 185—final optative with ἵνα 196 f.—dore c. infin. used for purpose 207---τοῦ c. infin. 216- 218--πρὸς τό and els τό c. infin. 218-220—use of participle 230
Final ¢ and » 49, 168, 187
First Epistle of Peter: prohibitions 124— preference for aorist imperative 174—for imperatival participles 181 —od . . . αὐτοῦ improbable in such good Greek 237
Fluellen 10,
Fourth Book of Maccabees, Atticising in 166, 197
Fourth Gospel and Apocalypse 9 f.
French idioms in English 13
Frequency, relative, of prepositions 62 f., 98, 100, 102, 105, 106 ἢ.
Frequentative verb, 114
Future: o. ἵνα 35—c. οὐ μὴ 35, 190 —c. ἐφ᾽ ¢ 107—in Indo-Germanic verb 108—compared with futural present 120—history of its form 149 —links with subjunctive 149, 184, 187, 240—action mixed 149f. — English rendering 1504. — volitive
274 INDEX OF
and futuristic uses 150 f.—its moods 151—-Middle in active verbs 154 ἢ, —Passive with middle force 161— used for imperative 176 f.—ditto with ὅπως 177—rarely with μή in
prohibition 177—in warning with }
py 178—c. εἰ 187—c. μή in cautious assertion 193—optative 197—infini- tive 204 f.— participle 230 Future Conditions: with ἐάν 185—with εἰ 187 —‘‘ less vivid form” 196, 199 Futuristic: future 150, 177—subjunc- tive 184, 185, 186, 192, 240
Gender 59 f.
Genitive: absolute 12, 74, 286—verbs with 65, 285—with ἀκούειν and γεύ- εσθαι 66—syncretism with ablative 72—objective and subjective 72— partitive 72 f., 102—with ὀψέ 72, 73 —time and place 73—definition 73 f. —Hebraism here 74—after negative adjective 74, 235 f. — prepositions with 100-102, 104-107, 237 — of material 102
German, illustrations from 94, 96
Gerundive in -réos 222
Gnomic aorist 135, 1839—present 188--- future 186
Gortyn Code 214—cf Cretan
Gothic 78, 181, 224
Grammar and literary criticism 9, 40f., 205, 211
Grammatica] and lexical Semitism 12
Greece, physical conditions of 23 f.
Headings, anarthrous 82
Hebraism : displacement of, in theory of NT Greek 1-3—in Rev 9—use of ἐν 11f., 61, 103—cf Gallicisms in English 13—év τῷ “6. inf. 14, 215 —in Lk 14-18—tested by MGr 17, 94—els for predicate 72—articular nom. in address 70, 235—gen. of definition 78 f.—gen. abs. 74—dat. or partic. for infin. abs. 75 f.—use of article 81, 236—redundance of pro- nouns 88ὅ---ψυχή used for reflexive 87, 105—relative with superfluous demonstrative 94f.—els as ordinal 95 f,—and as indef. art. 96 f.—dis- tributives 97—illustrated by AV 98 - ἐνώπιον 99—compound preposi- tions 99--- ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν 131—active for middle 158—infin. for imper. 180 —Hebrew teleology and final clauses 219—nom. pendens c. partic. 225— periphrastic tenses 226 f. — freedom of Mk from 242—cf under Over-use
Hebraist school of NT interpretation 2 f., 12, 223, 242
Hebrew : how far known in Palestine
SUBJECTS.
8, 233—NT (Delitzsch) 104, 163— tenses 108
Hebrews, Epistle to: did author know Aramaic ? 10—Greek style of 18, 20, 118, 129, 232, 237 — grammatical points in 62, 129, 182, 211, 217, 218 f., 231, 237
Hebrews, Gospel of 17—see Index I (6), p. 265
Hellenistic 2—see Common Greck
Heracleon 104
Herculaneum, papyri from, 27, 43
Hermogenes 172
Herodian : cases in 683—optative 197
Herodotus 51, 62, 81, 91, 101, 214, 215 —see also Index I (6), p. 263
Heteroclisis 48, 60 ΄
Hiatus 92, 117
Historic Present, 120 f., 139
Homer: the Acheans of 24—forms found in 55—syntax 121, 185, 147, 161—the Athenians’ ‘‘ Bible” 142— blamed by Protagoras for use of im- perative 172—~see Index I (6), p.263
Hypotaxis—see under Parataxis
Ignatius 215
Illiteracy 28, 36, 48, 49, 78, 87, 98, 142, 169, 189, 220, 237, 238, 239
Imperative: endings 53—of elul 56, 174—present, compared with aor. subj. in prohibition 122~126—tenses compared generally 129 f., 173 f., 176, 189, 238—prehistoric use 164— formal history, 165, 171 f.—tone of 172f., 175—prominence of in NT 173—aorist appropriate in prayer 178—in 3rd person 174 f.—expres- sions for Ist person 175 f.—auxiliary ἄφες 175 f.—perfect 176—substitutes for 176-182, 208, 223, 241, 248
Imperfect 128 f.—in unreal indic. 200 ἢ, —replaced by periphrasis 226 f.—see Present stem
Impersonal plural 58 f.—verbs 74, 226
Improper Prepositions 99
Inceptive action of -loxw suffix 120
Incommodi, Dativus 75
Indeclinable: Greek proper name not to be taken as 12---πλήρης, ἥμισυ and comparatives in -w 50
Indefinite Article 96 ἢ,
Indicative: alone may have inherent time-connotation 126, 128, 129 — imperfect 128 f.—aorist, used of im- mediate past 135, 140—rendering of aorist in English 135-140—yéyova not aoristic in NT145f., 238—pluper- fect 148—future 149-151—as modus trrealis 164, 199-201—with ἄν 166 f., 200 f.—with ὅταν, ὅπου ἄν, ὅσοι ἄν, ἐάν 168, 239—negatived by οὐ 170 ἢ
INDEX OF
—but μή not entirely expelled 170 f., 239 f.—negatived questions 170— future used for command 176 f., 240 —future with οὐ μή 190—c. μή in cautious assertions 192 f.—imperfect for present time in unfulfilled con- dition, wish, and purpose 200 f.— replaced by participle 222-224—peri- phrasis 225-227
Indirect Questions 196, 198 f.
Indo-Germanic: dual in 657 f. — numerals 58—cases 61, 72, 75—verb system 108 f.— Aktionsart 109 f.—per- fectivising by means of composition 111 f.—aorist-present in 119—aug- ment and the final -¢ in primary tenses 128—was there a future in ? 149—future participle 151—voice, its rationale in 152, 238—no separate passive 152—verbs with no middle 153—strong perfect without voice distinction 154— passive use of middle already developing in 156— Greek weak aorist passive developed from middle person-ending -thés 161 —differentia of the imperative 164, 171 f.—glottogonic theories of sub- junctive and optative 164—the injunctive 165—the two negatives 169—jussive subjunctive in posi- tive commands 177 f.—origins of the infinitive 202f.—its deficiency in voice 203, and tense 204—verbal adjectives and participles 221 f.— closeness of 3 pl. act. in -oné(z) to the participle 224
Infinitive: c. ἐν τῷ 14, 215—forms in contract verbs 58—future 151, 204 f. —for imperative 172, 179f., 203— articular (q.v.) 189, 218-220, 240— verb and noun 202—its origins 202- 204— comparisons with Sanskrit, Latin, English—202~-204, 207, 210— development of voice 203, and of tense 204—case-uses traced 203f., 207, 210—anarthrous expressing purpose 204, 205, 207, 217, 240 f.—conse- quence 204, 210—complementar 204—limitative 204—relations wit ἵνα c. subj. 205-209, 210f., 240 f.— with ὥστε final 207, 210—alleged Latinism 208—consecutive with ὥστε 209 f.—relations with ὥστε c. indic. 209 f., and with consecutive ἵνα 210 —subject and object 210 f.—accus. and infin. compared with ὅτι clause 211—accus. tending to replace regular nom. 212—not Latinism 212 f.— mixture of acc. c. inf. and ὅτι con- struction 213—=statistics 241
Ingressive action 109, 116, 117, 118, 180, 181, 145, 149, 174
SUBJECTS, 275
Injunctive mood 165
Inscriptions : Κοινή 6, 28, 28 f.—classi- cal, 23, 214—see Index I (c), pp. 258 f.
Instrumental case 61, 75, 104, 158— use of ἐν 12, 61 f., 75, 104
Interjectional character of voc. and imper. 171 f.—of infin. in imperatival sense 179, 203—of partic. or adj. used imperativally 180 f., 240—pre- positional clauses 183 f.
Internal accusative 65, 93
Interrogative : confused with relative 98 [.--- ποῖος and τίς, ποταπός 95— command 184
Intransitive : verbs becoming transitive 65, 162—use of strong perfect 147, 154— tendency of strong aorist 155
Ionic 83, 37 f., 43, 44, 48, 51, 55, 57, 81, 101, 195, 205
Ireland, bilingualism in 7
Irrational final « and » 49, 168, 187
Isolation of Biblical Greek 2, 3
Itacism 34 f., 47, 199, 239, 240
Iterative action 109, 114, 125, 127, 128, 129, 173, 180, 186, 248—use of ἄν 166, 167, 168
James: ἰδού in 11—prohibitions 126— use of Middle 160
Jerome 181
Jewish Greek 2f., 19—see Hebraism and Aramaic
John : Greek of Gospel and Apocalypse 9—place of writing 40f., 211—use of historic present 121—prohibitions 124, 125, 126---κμκἡ in questions 170, 239—periphrastic tenses 226, 227— compound verbs 237
Josephus 2, 28, 25, 62, 89, 121, 146, 189, 197, 238, 235—see Index I (e), Ῥ. 264
Jussive subjunctive 178, 208 — see Volitive
Justin Martyr 8, 148, 288---866 Index I (e), p. 264
Καθαρεύουσα 26,
Literary Κοινή Klepht ballads—see Index I (e), p. 265 Kowh 23—see Common Greek
80 —cf Atticism,
Laconian—see Sparta
Late Greek 1
Latin: Bible 5, 72, 106, 129, 182, 240 —Paul speaking 21, 233—cases 61— use of we for J 87—parallels with Greek, etc. 112, 158—the Middle 153 —subj. and indic. in cause-clauses 171—jussive subj. 177—prohibition 178—quin redeamus? 184—optative in indirect question 199—verbal
276 INDEX OF
nouns 202—infinitive 204—ut clauses 206—their weakened final force 207 f. —verbal adj. turned into participle 221—participle and adj. in -didis 222 —parallels to use of participle for indic. or imper. 223 f., 241—poverty in participles 229 f.
Latinisms 18, 20f., 71, 75, 100~102, 142, 208, 212 f., 247
Lesbian—see A colic
Lewis Syriac 58, 65, 72, 248
Lexical notes: els ἀπάντησιν 14—vais 25 [.----ἀφιξις 26---ἐρωτᾶν 66---σκύλλειν 89---ἐνώπιον 99---ἐπιφανής, ἐπιφάνεια 102 --- ἐπιβαλών 181] --- ἀποκόψονται 163, 201---προσφάγιον 170---παιδία 170---προστίθεσθαι 232—elxéves 235
Lexical: studies of Deissmann 4— Hebraisms 11, 12, 46, 233
Limitative infinitive 204
Linear action 109, 110, 111, 114, 117, 119, 120, 125, 126, 127, 128, 147, 149 f., 178, 174, 175, 180, 188, 186, 233
Literary element in NT 20, 25f., 26, 55, 106, 147 f., 204, 211—see under Hebrews, Paw, Luke
Literary Κοινή 2f., 21, 22f., 24-26, 62 f., 64, 88, 118, 194, 197, 211— its analogue in MGr 21, 26, 30—element in inscriptions 29—see Atticism
Lithuanian: alleged Latinising gen. found in 101—future in -stu 149
Local cases 60 f.
Localising of textual types 41
Locative 61, 75, 104, 202 f.
Logia 15, 104, 124, 126, 189, 191
Lord’s Prayer 10, 178
Lost cases 61
Lucian 25, 170, 197, 227—see Index I (e), p. 264
Luke: did he know Aramaic? 10, 15, 104—style11, 18, 20, 282—-Hebraism in 13-18—unity of Lucan writings 14, 217—preserving words of source 15, 18, 106, 287, contra 159, 242— construction of ἐγένετο for "πὴ 16 f., 70, 233—was ‘‘ Hebrew’s Gospel” a source? 26—misusing a literary word ?
' 26—recalling Homer? 26—use of ὦ 71—projected third treatise ὃ 79—use of ““ dual” words 79 ἴ.---ὅστις 91 f.— generalising 119—historic present 121—prohibitions 124—iterative ἂν 167 f.—optative 165, 195, 198 f.— ““correct”’ use of πρίν 169, 199— preference for pres. imper. com- pared with Mt 174---ἀρξάμενοι 182, 240—ot μή 190 f.—hymns in, their use of infin. 210—acc. c. inf. 211— τοῦ c. inf. 216 f.—literary survival of οὐ c. partic. 232—his two editions
SUBJECTS.
288---ἔλαιων 69, 285—artic. nom. of address 235 — ελάχιστος 236 —com- pound verbs 237—see Acts
LXX—see Septuagint
Lycaonian 7 f., 233
Lystra—see Lycaonian
Magnesia 29, 38, 43
Manuscripts of NT, orthography tested 42-56
Marcion 114
Mark: uncultured Greek 50, 53, 71— dative 62—els and ἐν 62—the Middle 159—4ray, etc. c. indic. 168—subj. in comparisons 185—fut. c. od μή 190, 191—optative 195—compound verbs 237—1rich in Aramaism 242
Matthew : improves Greek of his source 15, 124, 159, 200, 237, 242—xai ἰδού 17—historic present 121—prohibi- tions 124—aorist in 1387-140—aoristic γέγονα 146 — preference for aor. imper. in Sermon on the Mount 174 -- οὐ μή 190, 191—rov o. inf. 216— superlative ἐλάχιστος 236—com pound verbs 237
Middle: of εἰμί 36f., 55f.—with and without expressed personal pronoun (gen. or dat.) 85, 157, 236 f.—primi- tive differentia 152, 238—in Sanskrit, Latin, and Keltic 153—‘‘ Deponents”’ 153—links with the strong perfect 154, and with future 164 f.—how far reflexive 155f., 288—evolution of a passive 156—compared with English verbs that are both transitive and intransitive 156f.—paraphrased by reflexive in dative case 157—typical exx. 157—reciprocal 157—dynamic 158—mental action 158—differences between Attic and Hellenistic 158 f. —‘‘incorrect” uses in NT and papyri 159f.—Paul not implicated 160—alretvy and αἰτεῖσθαι 160 f.— middle and passive aorists 161 f.— verbsin which active became obsolete, or was recoined out of a deponent 162—common ground between middle and passive 162 f.
Misplacement of article 84
Misuse of old literary words 26
Mixed declension 49
Modern Greek : καί in place of hypo- taxis 12—used as a criterion against Semitism 17, 94—the study com- paratively recent 22, 29—dialects in 23 (see Pontic and Zaconian)—the written language (see Atticism and kaOapevovoa)—use of the modern vernacular in NT study 29 f.— versions of NT 30 (see Index I (e), p. 265)—Ionic forms in 38—parti-
INDEX OF
ciple now indeclinable 60, 225— gender changes 60—the dative obso- ete 60, 63—vocative 71—article as a relative 81—redundant personal or demonstrative pronoun 85, 94— relative 94—interrogative 94, 95— cardinals as ordinals 96—indefinite article 96 —distributives 97 — sup- ports Purdie’s thesis on the consta- tive 115— present tense for our perfect, with words of duration 119 —historic present alternating with aorist 121, 139—pres. and aor. subj. in prohibition 122—imper. in pro- hibition 122, 164—imperf. and aor. compared 128f.—idiom of ἐξέστη 134—gnomic aorist 135—the perfect obsolete 141 f.—use of Middle 156, 157—new active verbs 162—subj. for relics of ἄν 167—negatives 169, 170, 232—auxiliaries forming imperative 175 f., 178, and future 179, 185—sole survival of optative 194, of learned origin 240—infinitive obsolete, ex- cept in Pontic (g.v.) 205—early date of its characteristics illustrated 288 f. —periphrastic future 284, 240—the parenthetic nominative 235 — see Index I (e), p. 265, and II, p. 269
Modus irrealis 164, 199-201
Moeris 46, 55
Month, numerals for days of 96
Moods: common subjective element 164—other common ground 16ὅ---ἄν in connexion with 165-169—nega- tives (q.v.) 169-171 al—see under Imperative, Injunctive, Optative, Sub- junctive, and Modus irrealis
Mystical ἐν of Paul 68, 103

Narrative, tenses in 135
Nasal in word-endings 45, 49
Negative adjective c. gen. 74, 235
Negatives: in Atticists 25—in NT and papyri 89, 169-171, 177, 184, 185, 187-194, 200, 229, 231 f., 239, 240
Neuter plurals 57 f.
‘¢ Neutral’’ text—see B-text
New Testament, how far its diction peculiar 19 f., 67 f.
Nominative: as receiver of unappro- priated uses 69—name-case unassi- milated 69, 2835—nominativuspendens 69, 225—parenthetic in time expres- sions and εἰκόνες 70, 235—articular in address 70f., 235—replaced as predicate by εἰς c. acc. 71 f.—per- sonal pronouns not always emphatic 85 f.—for accus. as subject to infin. 212 f.
Nonthematic present stems 38, 55
North-West Greek 33, 36 f., 55
SUBJECTS. 277
Nouns: in -pé and -via 38, 48—hetero clisis 48, 60—contracted 48—in -ovs passing into 3rd decl, 48—in -ts, -cv, from -cos and -ἰον 48 f.—mixed de- clension 49—accusatives with added -v 49—number 57-59—gender 59 ἢ, —breach of concord 59 f.—case 60- 76, 234-236
Number: disappearance of dual 57 f., 77£.— neuter plural, history and syntax of 57 f.—‘“‘ Pindaric” con- struction 58, 234—impersonal plural 58 f., 168---ἡμεῖς for ἐγώ 86 f., 246
Numerals: εἷς as an ordinal 95f., 237 —ordinals in MGr 96—simplified “‘teens”’ 96—els as indefinite article 96f.—d εἷς 97—repeated to form distributives 97--- ὄγδοον Νῶε in AV 97 1.---ἑβδομηκοντάκις ἑπτά 98
Object clauses 210-213 Objective Genitive 72, 236 ᾿Ομιλουμένη 26 Omission of ἄν 194, 198, 200 f. Optative: in Lucian 2ὅ--δῴη 55, 193 f. — future 151, 197 — origin 164 f.—with ἄν 166, 198—after πρίν 169, 199—in command 179—in LXX 194—compared with subj., and with future 194—optative proper 194-197 — compared with English survivals 195—in hypothesis 196— differentia of optative conditional sentences 196, 198, 199—in final clauses 196 f.—Atticisers ignorant of sequence 197—misuses in Byzantine Greek 197—potential optative 197- 199—attended by od and av 197—a literary use, but not yet artificial 197—omission of ἄν 198—in indirect questions, contrasted with Latin 198 f.—Luke observes sequence 199 ——itacism in late period hastens decay 199, 239, 240 Oratio obliqua 142, 144, 151, 196, 228, 239 Ordinals: use of εἷς 95f., 237—sim- plified ‘‘ teens” 96 Origen 139, 169 Orthography : Attic basis 34—a test of provenance of MSS 41—correspond- ence of NT and papyri 42-56 Over-use of vernacular locutions agree- ing with Semitic 11, 14, 39, 61, 72, 74, 95, 99, 215, 226, 2385, 242 Oxyrhynchus Zogia 3, 51, 180, 191 f. —MS of Heb 190, 224
Pagan phraseology 84, 102
Papyri: non-literary, their importance brought out by Deissmann 3 f.— education of writers 4 al (see Hdu-
278 INDEX OF
SUBJECTS.
cation and illiteracy) compared | Perfect: for event on permanent re-
with inscriptions 6, 28—remarkable anticipation by Brunet de Presle 6 ἢ. —their character and use 27 f.—ex- ceptions to their general agreement with NT 39, 46, 53—see Index I (4), pp. 252-255
Parataxis 12, 178, 185, 198
Parenthetic nom. in time-expressions 69, 235, 245—in descriptions 69
Participle: pleonastic by Semitism 14, 280, 241—negatives with 25, 229, 231 f., 239—tendency towards in- decl. 60—in gen. abs. 74—1trans- lating Hebrew inf. abs. 76—present with article 126f., 228—aorist of coincident or identical action 130- 134, 288—that of subsequent action denied 132-134—with ἄν 167—for imperative 180-183, 228, 240—for optative 182—overdone by Josephus 189—for indic. 222-225, 241—in periphrastic tenses 226 f.—comple- mentary 228f.—contrasted with partic. in Latin and English 229— conditional 229 f.—conjunctive, con- cessive, causal, final, temporal, and attendant circumstances 230—alleged Aramaism 231
Partitive Genitive : largely replaced by ἀπό or ἐκ ὁ. abl. 72, 102—possibly with ὀψέ 72—as subject of a sentence 73, 228
Passive: no separate forms in Indo- Germanic 108, 152, 156—invades middle in Greek, Latin and else- where 153—evolved from intransitive 156—only partially differentiated in aorist and future 161 f.—common ground with middle 162 f.—replaced largely in Aramaic by impersonal plural 163—not definitely attached to the verbal adjective 221 f.
Past time 108, 119, 128, 129
Paul: spoke Greek 7, 19, Latin? 21, 233, Aramaic 7, 10—limited literary phraseology 20—his ἐν Χριστῷ 68, 103—-use of we for Z 86f.—use of between 99—prohibitions 124-126— perfect 145, 238 — middle 160— iterative ἄν 167, 168—prefers present imperative 174 --- imperatival par- ticiple 181—ov μή 190—optative 195 —acc. et inf.—211—roé c. inf. 217 ---πρὸς τό and els τό ὁ. inf. 218 f— periphrastic tenses 226, 227—ov 0. partic. 232 — ἐλάχιστος and ἐἔλα- χιστότερος 236 — compound verbs 287---μή in questions 299--- μήτιγε 240
Perfect: action 109, 111—in English, its double force 136
cord 129, 142, 143 f.—vivid use for event yet future 134 — compared with aorist 140 f.—increasing use in vernacular 141—may be used with a point of time 141, 146—decayed in medieval Greek 141 f.—obsolete in MGr 141 f.—Latin not responsible 142—characteristic use in Heb 142, 148 f.—combined with aorist 142 f., 238—genuinely aoristic uses possible in Rev 148, 145—broken continuity 144, 145—toxnxa 145, 288---πέπρακα 145—yéyova 145 f., 239—with pre- sent meaning 147, 176, 238 — xé- κραγα 147----ἥγημαι literary in Ac 148 —strong perfect normally intransi- tive 154— originally voiceless 154— imperative 176—periphrastic forms 176, 226
Perfective verbs 111-118, 128, 237, 247
Pergamum 29, 38
Periphrasis 226f., 249—see under Participle, and the several tenses
Person-endings 51-54, 152, 154
Personal Pronouns: alleged Semitism 84 f., 94f.—emphasis in nominative 85 f.— iets for ἐγώ 86 f.
Perspective, action in—see Constative
Philo 2, 96—see Index I (e), P. 264
Phrygian Greek 56—see Index 1 (ce),
259
p.
Phrynichus 39, 194
Pictorial imperfect 128
Pindar 214—see Index I (e), Ὁ. 268
Pindaric construction 58, 234
Place, genitive of 73
Plato 62, 218, 215—see Index I (6), p. 263
Pleonasm 14-16, 85, 94f., 230, 237, 241
Pluperfect: endings 58—action 113, 148—in conditional sentences, 201
Plural—see Number
Plutarch : optative 197---ὅτι μή 239— see Index I (6), p. 264.
Polybius 14, 21, 23, 25, 30, 39, 62, 85, 92, 115-118, 197, 206f., 247—see
- Index I (e), p. 264.
Pontic dialect of MGr 40, 45, 47, 94, 180, 205
Point action—see Puncisliar
Popular etymology 96
Position of article 83 f.
Potential 165, 197-199
Prayer: the Lord’s 10, 173—absence of ὦ in 71—Jn 17, use of aorist in 137—aorist imper. appropriate to 173 —optative in 195
Predicate, with εἰς 71
Prepositional clause, anarthrous and articular, 81 f., 236
Prepositions: added to local cases in

INDEX OF
Greek 61—extended use in Heile- nistic, not due to Semitism 61 f.— statistics for classical and post- classical historians 62 f., and for NT 62f., 98—in composition with verbs 65, 111-118, 128, 287—re- placing partitive gen. 72—‘‘ Hebraic” phrases 81 f.—dropping of article between prep. and infin. 81, 216— tendency to drop article after 82, 236 — combinations with adverbs 99 — Semitism 99 f. — with one case 100-104 — alleged Latinisms 100 -102 — over-use paving the way for extinction 103 f. — with two cases 104-106—statistics 105— with three cases 106 fi—adverbs in essence 112—dropped when com- pound is repeated soon after 115— compounds tend to be used instead of punctiliar simplex 115-118 — Polybius using compounds to avoid hiatus 117—NT writers use them less than the Jittérateurs 118—with articular infinitive 216, 218-220, 241 —see Index II under the several Prepositions
Present stem: twenty-three Greek varieties of 109—its linear action 109, 110, 111, 114, 117, 119, 120, 125, 126, 127, 128, 147, 149, 173, 174, 175, 180, 183, 186—iterative action 109, 114, 119, 125, 127, 128, 129, 178, 180, 186, 233—verbs de- fective in 110f.—in perfectivised verbs 113 f.—punctiliar action 119 f., 238—contrasted with aorist in pro- hibitions 122-126—conative action 125, 127, 128 f., 147, 178f., 186— timeless articular participle 126 f.— statistics with av 166—imperative, compared with aorist 173 f., 238— quasi-ingressive in ἀποχωρεῖτε 174 —subjunctive in warning clauses 178—subjunctive with compounds of ἄν, compared with aorist 186— participle in periphrasis 227—special uses of ὁ ὧν 228—see Imperfect and Present tense
Present tense: for future time 114, 120, 167—with πάλαι, etc., rendered by our perfect 119—for past time (historic present) 120-122, 189—see Present stem
Prohibition : distinction of present and aorist in 122—126—not originally expressed by imperative, nor now in MGr 164—use of injunctive 165— negative in 169, 187 f., 192—in same category as commands 178---οὐ μή 187 f.—must be treated here with denial 187 f.
SUBJECTS. 279
Pronouns: possessive 40—duality 77, 79 f.—personal 84-87—reflexives 8) —unemphatic ἑαυτοῦ and ἴδιος 87-90, 237—6 ἴδιος 90 f.—adrds ὁ and ὁ αὐτός 91—relatives 91-95 — inter-
_ rogatives 98 f., 95
Pronunciation 28, 33-36, 240, 248, 244 —see ltacism
Proper names and Article 88, 236
Prophecy, use of shad? in 150 f.
Protagoras 172
Psilosis 38, 38, 44
Punctiliar action 109-111, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 126, 129-181, 135, 145, 149, 178, 174, 186, 222, 247
Purist school of NT grammarians 8, 242
Purists in MGr 26, 80, 248—cef Atticiam
Purpose—see Final clauses
66 Q Ἄς 566 L ogia
Qualitative use of anarthrous noun 82 f.
Quantity, levelling of 34
Questions: with μήτι 170—with οὐ 170, 177—with μή 170, 192f., 289 --- indirect, in optative 196
Quotations from classical Greek 45, 81, 156, 233, 238 ἢ,
Quotations from OT 11, 16, 52, 124, 174, 188, 190, 192, 224, 235—see Index I (5), p. 257
Reciprocal Middle 157
Reciprocal Pronoun, ἑαυτούς used for 87
Reduplication 109, 142, 145
Reference, dative of 63, 75
Reflexive Middle 155-157, 168
Reflexives: no distinction for persons in plural 87—this confusion illiterate in singular 87-——-used for ἀλλήλους 87 —replaced by Semitic use of ψυχή 87—unemphatic ἑαυτοῦ 87-90
Relative time 148
Relatives: pleonastic demonstrative with 85, 94f., 287---ὅστις 91-93— attraction 92 f.—confused with inter- rogatives 98f.—with ἄν (ἐάν) 166, 234—relative sentences, μή in 171, 289—relative clauses replaced by articular participle 228
Religion : technical language 18—con- servative phraseology 20
Repetition, making distributives and alatives 97
Reported speech—see Oratio obliqua
Result clauses—sce Consecutive
Resurrection, voice of the verbs applied to 163
Revelation—see Apocalypse
Revised Version of NT: quoted or discussed 20, 50, 69, 72, 75, 90, 91,
280 INDEX OF
116, 117, 128, 129, 182, 136-140,
148, 163, 175, 184, 189, 225, 229,
231, 241 — margin 65, 66, 75, 78,
98, 137, 148, 163, 221, 222—the
First Revision 83, 156, 180 Rhetoric, rules for command in 172 Rome, Greek used at 5, 242
Sahidic 80
Sanskrit: survival of Indo-Germanic cases 61—locative of indirect object 104—aorist of ‘‘thing just happened ”’ 135—future in -sy@mi 149—gram- marians’ names for active and middle 153—2 sing. mid. secondary suffix -thds compared with Greek weak aorist passive 161—survival of the injunctive 165—imperative suffix «(αἰ 172—Vedic subjunctive makes in Epic a 1st person imperative 175 —Vedic infinitives 203 — classical ditto 204—infinitive parallel with sequimint 224—parenthetic nomina- tive in time-expression 285—active and middle forms differentiated by A blaut 238
Scotch parallel to dy 166, 239
Second Epistle of Peter 78, 98, 171, 238 f.
Semitism—-see Aramaic and Hebraism
Septuagint: ‘‘translation Greek” of 2f., 13—Justin Martyr’s dependence on 8, 233—els ἀπάντησιν in 14— constructions of éyévero='7) 16 f.— extent of Luke’s imitation 18 — Hebraisms from this source to be carefully distinguished from Arama- isms 18—8rd pl. forms in -σαν 33— indecl. πλήρης 50—gender of Βάαλ δ9---αὕτη for nit 59---πιστεύειν 67 f.— parenthetic nominative 70—violent use of gen. abs. 74—renderings of the Hebrew infin. abs, 75 f.—‘‘ex- hausted”’ {cos and ἑαυτοῦ 88—redun- dant demonstrative after relative 95, 237—‘‘seventy-seven times” 98— uses of ἐν 103—statistics for πρός c.
ς dat. and gen. 106—historic present 121 — ἀποκριθεὶς εἶπεν 131 —semi- aoristic perfect 142—aorist and per- fect together 143—xéxpaya and κράζω 147---κοιμᾶν active 162—azoxexop- μένος 163—statistics for ἄν 166— perf. imper. 176—subj. used for future 185—od μή 188, 191 ἔ.---δῴη optative 194—e/ c. opt. 196—opta- tive disappearing in final clauses 197 —potential opt. 197 ἴ.---ὄφελον 201 —articular infin. 220, 241— participle for indicative 224—partic. c. εἰμί, disproving Aramaism 226—8) c, partic. translated with οὐ 282---ἐάν
SUBJECTS.
for dv 234—articular nom. in address 235—la for πρώτη 237—statistics for infin. 241—Mk little influenced by 242—see under Quotations, and Index I (δ), p. 250
Sequence, rules of: Luke observes with πρίν 169, 199—breach of 197—in indirect question 199
Sermon on the Mount, respective pro- portions of aorist and present imper. in Mt and Lk 174
Sextus Empiricus 52
Shall and Will 150 f.
Simple conditions 171
Sinaiticus, Codex 34, 35, 38, 42, 45, 47, 52, 58, 55, 65, 90, 133, 181, 190 al
Slavonic: perfective compounds 111— future from that in -syd (obsolete) 149—cf Lithuanian
Sophocles 215—see Index I (6), p. 268
Sources for study of Κοινή 22 f., 27-30
Sparta 24, 32
Spoken Greek—see Vernacular
Style, in Luke and Heb (q.v.) 18
Subjective genitive 72, 236—moods 164—negative 169 f.
Subjunctive: itacistic confusions with indicative 85—forms in contract verbs 54—dwy 55, 193f., 196—origin 164 —relation to injunctive 165—after compounds of ἄν 166, 186, 239, 240 —after πρὶν (ἢ) ἄν 169—after εἰ μήτι ἄν 169, 239—negatives 170, 184f., 187 f., 190, 192—1st person volitive used to supplement imperative 175, 177—ditto in 2nd and 3rd _ person 177 f.—volitive in positive commands 177 f.—c. ἵνα as an imperative 177 f. —its tone in command 178—with μή in warning 178, 184—present allowed here 178 —classified 184 — volitive 184 f.—deliberative 184, 185—futur- istic 184, 185, 186, 192, 240—future indic, trespasses on all three 184 f., 240—volitive clauses of purpose 185 (see Final)—futuristic with ἐάν and ὅταν (g.v. in Index II), ete. 185—in comparisons 185 f.—tenses of 186— with ef 187, 239—has excluded optative from final clauses 196 f.— c. ἵνα has become equivalent of infin. 205 (see ἕνα in Index IT)
Subsequent action, alleged aor. partic. of 182-134
Suffixes—see severally in Index IT
Superfluous words—see Pleonasm
Superlative 78 f., 236
Syncretism of cases 61, 72, 104—of tenses in English 135
Synoptic question, grammatical points in 15-18, 71, 95, 103, 104, 105, 124,
INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 281
174, 175, 189-192, 224, 226f., 231, 236, 241, 242—see under Matthew, Mark, Luke
Syntax: alleged Semitisms in 12 f.— Latinisms 21
Syriac 104, 241, 244—see Lewis, and cf Aramaic
Syrian Recension 42, §8—see a-text
Teleology 219
Telic—see Final clauses
Temporal Participle 230
Tenses: connexion with time un- original 108f., 119—with ἄν 166, 186—in conditional sentences 166, 201—in infinitive 204—in verbal ad- jective 221—see under the several Tenses
Tertullian 69
Textual Criticism: pronunciation bear- ing on 34-36—a, β and ὃ text (¢.v.)— see also under Alexandrinus, Bezac, Sinatticus, Vaticanus, ete.
**Textus Receptus ’—see a-text
Thematic vowel 171
Thucydides 25, 62, 215, 216—see Index I (e), p. 268
Time: cases expressing 63, 70, 72, 78, 75—econnexion with tense un- original 108f., 119—expressed by augment, and possibly by suffix -2 128—the perfect accompanied by mark of 141
Timelessness: participles 126 f., 134— perfect and aorist 134
Traditional spelling 88 f.
‘Translation Greek” 4, 13, 39, 59, 76, 102, 104, 105, 106, 188f., 237, 240,
242, 248—see Hehratsm and Aramaic,
Translations of NT: Latin, Syriac, Sahidic, Bohairic, Gothic (q¢.v.)— Hebrew (Delitzsch) 104, 163—MGr (Pallis and B.F.B.S.) 22, 30—see Index I (6), p. 265
Uncontracted vowels 38, 48, 54 f., 234
Unemphatic pronouns 85—eavroi and ἴδιος 87-90
Unfulfilled condition 171, 196, 199- 201—wish 200—purpose 201
Unification of Greek dialects 30
Uniformity of Kowy 5f.,19, 38-41
Universal language, Greek as a 5f., 19, 28 f., 31
Vase-inscriptions, Attic 31, 33
Vaticanus, Codex 34, 35, 38, 42, 47, 52, 53, 54, 80, 90, 97, 131, 133, 159, 169, 181, 190, 244 al—see A-teat
Verba dicendi et cogitandi 239
Verbal adjectives 221 f.
Verbs: forms 38, 51-56—in μὲ (see Nonthematic)—number 58 f.—transi- tive and intransitive 64, 65 (¢.v.)— cases governed by 64-68—Aktionsart 108-118, 221 αἷ (see Action-form)— defectives 110 f.—compounds (q.v.) — tenses 119-151 (see under the several tenses)—voice (q.v.) 152-163 —moods (¢.v.) 164—201—infinitive and participle (¢.v.) 202-232
Vernacular Greek 1, 4 f., 22-41, 83, 85, 188, 234, 239 al
Vocative : not strictly a case 60—rela- tions with articular nominative of address 70 f., 235—few forms sur- viving 71—anarthrous nominative tends to supplant it 71—progressive omission of ὦ 71—like imperative, 18 an interjection 171
Voice 152-1638, 221, 238f.—see Middle, Passive, Active
Volitive future 150, 151, 177 —subjunc- tive 175, 177f., 184f.—see under Future and Subjunctive
Vulgate—see Latin
Wales, bilingualism in 7 f., 10 f.
“ 6 ”-document 217—see Acts
Week, days of 96, 237
‘* Western ” Text—see 5-teat
Wish: optative in 195—unrealised 200 f.—ditto in future with ὄφελον 201
World-language—see Universal
Wulfila—see Gothic
Xenophon: fore-runner of Hellenism 31—grammar of 62—see Index I (e), p. 268
Xenophon, pseudo- 25—see Index J (6), p. 268
Zaconian, 82, 249
ADDENDA TO INDICES
MATTHEW PAGE 5. 24 247 5.25 . 249 6. 2, 5, 16 247 7.29 . 227 10. Il . . . 249 17 . . . 246 27. 29. . . 246 ᾿ MARK 13. 20 . 246 LUKE 4. 29 249 19. 37 244 JOHN 2.16. . 249 4. 52f.. . . 245 Omit [8. 11]. . 189 15.13 - . . 249 17. 21, 241. 245 18. 11 . 189 Acts IO. 30 . , 245 19. 27, 37 60, 244
PAGE 1 Sam. (1 K.) 20.3 245 Job 21. 24 - 650
.-....» .
INDEX I.
(a) NEw TESTAMENT.
RoMANS PAGE 5. 2 248 14. 5 246
1 CoRINTHIANS
7. 21 247 7. 28 247 7. 29 248
2 CORINTHIANS
11.323. . . 248 121. . . 248
GALATIANS 2.14 . . . 244 4.18. . . 248 3.21 . . . 245 4. 23 . 248 5. 4 . 247 5.17. . 249 6. το 249 6. 12 . 247 EPHESIANS δ. 5 245, 246
(6) OLD TESTAMENT.
PAGE Isai. 37. 38 . 244 »» 63.2 244 APOCRYPHA. Wis. 7.14 .
282
245
CoLOSSIANS PAGE
2. 18 239
1 THESSALONIANS
2.16. . . 4249 5.4 (te . . 249 5.11. . . 246 2 TIMOTHY 4.7 . . . 237 HEBREWS 77 246 1.17. . 247 12,17 . . . 245 JAMES I, 19 245 5. 12 126 1 PETER I. I! 246 I . . 90 PAGE Jer. 42 (49). 22 245


ADDENDA TO INDICES.
(α)ὴ Papyri BU PAGE | Par P no. 5 . . 240] no5 - Il. ἢ 240 ι6. . 244 530 2440} RL. 798 247 ΑΡ no. 99 e« 246 | no. 135. Hb P Hibeh Papyri (all iii/s.c.) (1906). no. 22. 246 | no. 77 . 44. . . 246
Ostraka (ed. Wilcken). nos. I-goo . 243f., 246 | no. 240.
AND OSTRAKA.
PAGE| OP PAGE . 246; no. 466 ° . 244 TbP
. 248] no. 16. . . 246 όι. . . 244
. 246 f. . 244] no. 78 . . . 248 245 | πο. 927 . 245
Mélanges Nicole (Studies, largely papyrological, in honour of Prof. Jules
Nicole, Geneva, 1905).
p. 184 . 244] p. 185 . 244 | p. 281 . . . 246 JHS = xxii. 358. 244] BCH xxiv. 339 —. . 244 (6) GREEK LITERATURE.
i. Classical. li. Hellenistic.
Aeschylus PAGE PAGE
Prom. Vinet. 268 f. . 249 | Flavius Josephus 358 . . . 245 Antiqu. χὶν. 317 . . . 101 Sophocles Ignatius (ii/a.D.) Oedipus Tyrannus 1068 . . 98 Eph. iii. and xi... . . 218 Euripides Arrian Medea822 . . . . 248 Epictetus iv. 1.39. ° . 247 Plato iv. I. 41 . . . 248 Apol, 268 9 ° 9 . 249) Aelian N.A. viii. 12 . . 79, 245 Pelagia Legende der hl. Pelagia, ed. Usener . 242, 244, 245, 246, 247, 249 INDEX IL.
ἄλλος and ἕτερος 80, 246
ἄν dropped with ἕως, etc. 249 ἀπέρχομαι 247
ἀπέχω 247
ἀπό in composition 247 ἀφικνεῖσθαι 247
διαγράφω tenses of 247 Bois, Sot 244 δώδεκα and δέκα δύο 96, 246
ἐάν c. indic. 248
els: with ἀπάντησιν 242—supplies peri- phrasis for gen, 246
els in reciprocal 246
ἐκ in MGr 246
ἐν relations with εἰς 63, 245
ἐνώπιον 99, 246
ἔρχομαι with dativus incommodi 75, 245
ἐσθής, ἔσθησις 244
θέλειν construction 248
ἵνα 6. subj. for imper. 248—relations with infin. 248—ecbatic 249 tore imper. or indic. 245
κόρη 38, 244 κράβατος 244
284
μετά ‘‘Semitism” with ποιεῖν 106, 246 f, μήπως 248
ὅπως 177, 178, 206 f. éray=when 168, 248 ὅτι for ὥστε 209, 249 ov μή 249
oval ἀπό 246
παρέχειν voices of, 248
ADDENDA TO INDICES.
was ‘° Hebraistic ” with negative, 245 f. πατήρ voc. 245 πρῶτος 0. gen. 245
Σκευᾶς 246 σνγγενεῦσι, συγγενίς 244
τέσσαρες 800. 248 τέσσερας, τεσσεράκοντα 244
ws for ἕως 249 ὥστε 249
MODERN GREEK.
PAGE PAGE ᾽δεῖν = ἰδεῖν (Cos) ry e . 249 μήπως ° e . e . 248 det ; ; ; . 102, 246 παρά compounded . . . 247 ‘ πᾶσα. . . . . . 244 ἔφθασα, . . . . 247 πολεμῶ μέ, ᾿ ᾿ ᾿ 247 κἄτι e e e e r 244 ws = éws Φ e e e e 249 . ι INDEX III. Aeschines 245 Kown 248
Aorist: action-form 247—expressing immediate past 247—compared with perfect 247 f.
Aramaic: in Egypt 242—infin. for imper. 248
Attic: treatment of ἃ 244
Bezae, Codex 244, 249 Bilingualism 243
Dative, illiterate use of gen. for, 245
Education, varieties of 244 ‘* Exhausted ” tScos 246
Final clauses: weakened ἵνα 249
Genitive: with ἀκούειν and γεύεσθαι 245 —partitive 245—els supplying for possessive 246
Hebraism: ἴστε γινώσκοντες 245—use of πᾶς with negative 246 f.
Imperfect 248
Infinitive: for imperative 248—pur- pose (anarthrous)249—relations with ἵνα 248—in MGr 249
John: use of ἵνα 206, 249
Καθαρεύουσα 248, 245, 246
Lexical notes: els ἀπάντησιν 242 Literary element in NT 245 Luke: accurate use of ἡ θεός 60, 244
Middle: ‘‘ incorrect” uses 248
Modern Greek : versions of NT 243— πᾶσα 244-.- ἀπό 24ῦ---τις 246—sur- Vivals 249
Ostraka 243 ff., 288
Partitive gen., replaced by ἀπό 245
Paul: literary use of tore? 245—use of perfect 248—Hebraism in? 245
Perfect: in reff. to Scripture, Paul 248—combined with aorist—éoxnKa 248
Prepositions, replacing partitive 24ξ
Present stem: punctiliar 247—im- perative compared with aorist 247
Revised Version 245
Subjunctive, futuristic 249 Symmachus 245.
Textual Criticism: pronunciation bear- ing on, 244—relations of B and Ὁ
244, 249 O
Time, cases expressing 245


PUBLICATIONS OF
T. ἃ T. CLARK,
38 GEORGE STREET, EDINBURGH.
Abbott (T. K., B.D., D.Lit.)—EPHESIANS AND COLOSSIANS. (Jnter- national Critical Commentary.) Post 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Adams (Prof. John. B.Sc.)—PRIMER ON TEACHING, with special reference to Sunday School Work. 6d.
Adamson (Rev. R. M., Μ.4.)--- ΤῊΝ CHRISTIAN DocTRINE OF LORD’S Suprer. Imperial 16mo (8 x 6), 4s. 6d. net.
Adamson (T., D.D.)—THE Spirit oF Power. 2nd Ed., fcap. 8vo, ls.
Ahlfeld (Dr.), etc.—THE VOICE FROM THE Cross. Cr. 8vo, price 5s.
Aitken (Rev. James, M.A.)—Tue Book or Jos, With Introduction and Notes. Crown 8vo, 15. 6d.
Alcock (Deborah)—THE SEVEN CHURCHES OF ASIA. Ils.
Alexander(Prof. W. Lindsay)—BIsLICALTHEOLOGY. Twovols. 8vo, 21s.
Allen (Prof. A. V. G., D.D.)—CHRISTIAN INSTITUTIONS. (International Theological Library.) Post 8vo, 12s.
Ancient Faith in Modern Light, The. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Andrews (8. J.)—-Tue Lirz or Our Lorp. Large post 8vo, 9s.
Ante-Nicene Christian Library—A COLLECTION OF ALL THE WorKS OF THE FATHERS OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH PRIOR TO THE COUNCIL OF Nioa#a. ‘ Twenty-four vols. 8vo, Subscription price, £6, 68. Selection of Four Volumes at Subscription price of 21s. Additional Volwme, containing MSS. discovered since the completion of the Series, 12s. 6d. net.
Augustine’s Works—KEdited by Marcus Dops, D.D. Fifteen vols. 8vo, Subscription price, £3, 19s. net. Selection of Four Volumes at Sub- scription price of 21s.
Balfour (R. G., D.D.)—CENTRAL TRUTHS AND SIDE IssuEs. 3s. 6d.
Ball (W. E., LL.D.)—Sr. PAUL AND THE RoMAN Law. Post 8vo, 4s. 6d.
Ballard (Frank, M.A., B.Sc.)—THE Miracies or UNBELIEF. Sixth Edition. Post 8vo, 2s. 6d. net.
Bannerman (Prof.)—THE CHURCH OF CHRIST. Two vols. 8vo, 21s.
Bannerman (D. D., D.D.)—-THE DOCTRINE OF THE CHURCH. 8vo, 12s.
Bartlet (Prof. J. Vernon, M.A.)—THE ApostoLtic AczE: Its Lirs, DocTRINE, WoRSHIP, AND Pouity. (Hras of Church History.) Crown 8vo, 6s.
Baumgarten (Professor) AposToLic History. Three vols. 8vo, 18s. net.
Bayne (P., LL.D.)—TH FREE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND. Post 8vo, 3s. 6d.
Beck (Dr.)—OUTLINES OF BIBLICAL PsycHOLoGy. Crown 8vo, 4s,
PASTORAL THEOLOGY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. Crown 8vo, 6s.
Bengel—GNnomon . ΟΕ THE NEw TESTAMENT. With Original Notes, Explanatory and Illustrative. Five vols. 8vo, Subscription price, 81s. 6d. Cheaper Edition, the five volumes bound in three, 24s.
Besser’s CHRIST THE LIFE OF THE WORLD. Price 6s.
Beveridge (Rev. John, B.D.)—THE CoVENANTERS. (New Bible Class Primer.) Paper covers, 6d. ; cloth covers, 8d.
Beveridge (Rev. W., M.A.)—-A SHorT HIsToRY OF THE WESTMINSTER ASSEMBLY. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d. net.
Beyschlag (W., D.D.)—NEw TESTAMENT THEOLOGY. Two vols. demy 8vo, Second Edition, 18s. net. ‘
Bible Class Handbooks. Crown 8vo. Forty-seven Volumes, 18. 3d. to 8s. each. Edited by Prof. Marcus Dops, D.D., and ALEx. Wuyrte, D.D. Detailed List free on application.
*..* Detailed Catalogue free on application.


2 T. and 7. Clark’s Publications.
Bible Class Primers. Forty-four now issued in the Series. Edited by Princ. 5. D. F. Satmonyp, D.D. Paper covers, 6d. each; free by post, 7d. In cloth, 8d.; free by post, 9d. Detasled List free on application.
Bible Dictionary. Edited by Jas. Hastines, D.D. Special Prospectus on application. In Five Volumes, imperial 8vo, price per Volume, in cloth, 28s. ; in half-morocco, 34s. Sets can also be had in various styles of leather bindings.
Bigg (Prof. C., D.D.)—St. Peter anp Sr. JupE. (Jnternational Critical Commentary.) Post 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Blaikie (Prof. W. G., D.D.)}—TH& PREACHERS OF SCOTLAND FROM THE 6TH TO THE 19TH CENTURY. Post 8vo, 7s. θά.
Blake (Buchanan, B.D,)—How To READ THE PrRopHets. Part I.—The Pre-Exilian Minor Prophets (with Joel). Second Edition, 4s. Part II.—Isaiah (ch. i.—xxxix.). Third Edition, 2s. 6d. Part III.—Jeremiah, 4s. Part I1V.— Ezekiel, 4s, Part V.—lIsaiah (ch. xl.-lxvi.), and the Post-Exilian Prophets. The Series being now complete, Messrs. Clark offer the Set of Five Volumes for 15s.
JOSEPH AND Moses: FOUNDERS OF ISRAEL. Crown 8vo, 48.
Bleek’s INTRODUCTION TO THE NEW TESTAMENT. 2 vols. 8vo, 12s. net.
Briggs (Prof. 0. A., D.D.)—GENERAL INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY or Hoty Scripture (Replacing the Author's ‘Biblical Study,’ entirely re-written and greatly enlarged). 8vo, 12s. net.
THE MESSIAH OF THE APOSTLES, Post 8vo, 7s. 6d.
ΤῊΝ MESSIAH OF THE GOSPELS. Post 8vo, 6s. 6d.
THE BIBLE, THE CHURCH, AND THE REASON. Post 8vo, 6s. 6d.
Brockelmann (C.)—LExicon SyrR1acum. With a Preface by Professor T. NOLDEKE. Orown 4to, 30s. net.
Brown (Prof. W. Adams)—THE ESSENCE OF CHRISTIANITY. Post 8vo, 6s. net.
Bruce (Prof. A. B., D.D.)—THE TRAINING OF THE TWELVE ; exhibiting the Twelve Disciples under Discipline for the Apostleship. 6th Ed., 10s. 6d.
THE HUMILIATION OF CHRIST. Sth Edition, 8vo, 10s. 6d.
THE KIN@pom OF Gop ; or, Christ’s Teaching according to the
Synoptical Gospels. Post 8vo, 7s. 6d.
APOLOGETICS; OR, CHRISTIANITY DEFENSIVELY STATED.
(International Theological Library.) Third Edition, post 8vo, 10s. 6d.
St. PAuL’s CONCEPTION OF CHRISTIANITY. Post 8vo, 7s. 6d.
THE EPISTLE TO THE Hesrews: The First Apology for Christianity. Second Edition, post 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Bruce (Rev. Β., D.D., Hon. Canon of Durham Cathedral.)—AposToLic ORDER AND Unity. Crown 8vo, 28. 6d. net. |
Bruce (W. 8., D.D.)—Tux Eruics oF THE OLD TESTAMENT. Cr. 8vo, 4s.
THE FORMATION OF CHRISTIAN CHARACTER. Crown 8vo, 5s.
Buhl (Prof. F.)—-CAaNON AND TEXT OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Bungener/Felix)—RoME AND THECOUNCIL IN 19™ CENTURY. Cr.8vo,5s.
Burton (Prof. E.)—SynTax OF THE Moops Aanp TENSES IN NEw TESTAMENT GREEK. Post 8vo, 5s. 6d. net. :
Caldecott and H. R. Mackintosh (Profs.)—-SELECTIONS FROM THE LITERATURE OF THEISM. 78. 6d. net.
Calvin’s INSTITUTESOF CHRISTIAN RELIGION. (Translation. )2vols.8vo, 1 4s.
CoMMENTARIES. Forty-five Vols. Price on application.
Calvini Institutio Christiane Religionis. Curavit A. THOLUCK. Two vols. 8vo, Subscription price, 1 48.
Candlish (Prof. J. 8., D.D.)—THE Kinepom or Gop, BIBLICALLY AND HISTORICALLY CONSIDERED. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
TuE CHRISTIAN SALVATION. Lectures on the Work of Christ.
8vo, 7s. 6d.












7. and 7. Clark's Publecatzons. 3

Oaspari (C. E.)—INTRODUCTION TO THE LIFE OF CHRIST. 8vo, 78. 6d.
Oaspers (A.)—THE FOOTSTEPS OF CHRIST. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Cassel (Prof.)—-COMMENTARY ON ESTHER. 8vo, 6s. net.
Cave (Principal A., D.D.)—THE ScRIPTURAL DOCTRINE OF SACRIFICE AND ATONEMENT. Second Edition, 8vo, 10s. 6d.
AN INTRODUCTION TO THEOLOGY. Second Edition, 8vo, 12s.
Chapman (Principal 0., LL.D.)—Prr-OrGANIC EVOLUTION AND THE BIBLICAL IDEA OF Gop. Crown 8vo, 6s.
Christlieb (Prof. T., D.D.)—MoDERN DouUBT AND CHRISTIAN BELIEF. 8vo, 6s. net.
Homietic: Lectures on Preaching. 7s. 6d.
Olark (Professor W. R., LL.D., D.C.L.)—THek ANGLICAN REFORMA- TION. (ras of Church History.) 8s.
THE PAaRACLETE. The Person and Work of the Holy Spirit.
Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.
PASCAL AND THE PorT RoYALISTs. Crown 8vo, 3s.
WITNESSES TO CHRIST. A Contribution to Christian Apolo- getics. Crown 8vo, 4s.
Olarke (Professor W. N., D.D.)—AN OUTLINE oF CHRISTIAN Turotocy. Thirteenth Edition, post 8vo, 7s. 6d.
THE USE OF THE SCRIPTURES IN THEOLOGY. Post 8vo, 4s.
WHAT SHALL WE THINK OF CHRISTIANITY? Cr. 8vo, 28. 6d.
CAN I BELIEVE IN GOD THE FATHER? Crown 8vo, 3s.
Concordance to the Greek Testament—Movutton (W. F., D.D.) and GEDEN (A. S., M.A.). Second Edition, crown 4to, 268. net.
Cooper and Maclean.—THE TESTAMENT OF OUR LORD. With Intro- duction and Notes by Prof. Coorzr, D.D., and Bishop MAcLEAN. 8vo, 9s.
Orawford (J. H., M.A.)—THE BROTHERHOOD OF MANKIND. Post 8vo, 5s.
Cremer (Professor)—BIBLICO-THEOLOGICAL LEXICON OF NEw ΤΈΒΤΑ- MENT GREEK. Third Edition, with Supplement, demy 4to, 38s.
Orippen (Rev. T. G@.)—A PoPpuLAR INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTORY OF CHRISTIAN DocTRINE. 8vo, 9s.
Ounningham (Principal) —HistoricaAL THEOLOGY. Two vols. 8vo, 21s.
Curtiss (Dr. 8. I.)\—Tue LeviticaL Priests. Crown 8vo, 5s.
FRANZ DeuirzscH: A Memorial Tribute. Portrait. Cr. 8vo, 3s.
Dahle (Bishop)—LiFrE aFTER DEaTH. Demy 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Dalman (Prof. G.\—THe Worps oF JEsus. Demy 8vo, 7s. 6d. net.
Davidson (Prof. A.B., D.D., LL.D.)—An INTRODUCTORY HEBREW GRAMMAR, With Progressive Exercises in Reading and Writing. 17th Edition, 8vo, 7s. 6d.
A SYNTAX OF THE HEBREW LANGUAGE. 3rd Ed., 8vo, 7s. 6d.
OLD TESTAMENT PROPHECY. Edited by Prof. J. A. PATER-
son, D.D. Demy 8vo, 10s. 6d. net.
THE THEOLOGY OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. (International
Theological Library.) Edited by Principal SatmonD, D.D. 12s.
THE CALLED oF Gop. With Biographical Introduction by
A. Taytor Innes, M.A., Advocate, and Portraits. Post 8vo, Second
Edition, 6s.
WAITING UPON Gop. A Further and Final Selection of
Sermons. Post 8vo, 6s.
THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.
Davidson, Dr. Samuel. Autobiography and Diary. Edited by his DAUGHTER. 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Davies (Principal D. 0.)—THE ATONEMENT AND INTERCESSION OF CHRIST. Crown 8vo, 4s.















4 ’ IT. and 7. Clark's Publications.
Deane (Wm., M.A.)— PsEUDEPIGRAPHA: The Books which influenced _ our Lord and the Apostles. Post 8vo, 78. 6d.
Deissmann (Dr. G. A.)—BiBLE Stupies. Second Edition, 8vo, 9s.
Delitzsch (Prof.)—System ur BIBLICAL PsyCHOLOGY, 8vo, 6s. net ; NEw CoMMENTARY ON GENESIS, 2 vols. 8vo, 12s. net; PsaLMs, 3 vols., 18s. net; PROVERBS, 2 vols., 12s. net; Sone oF SOLOMON AND ECCLESIASTES, 6s. net; IsaraH, Fourth Edition, rewritten, 2 vols., 12s, net; HEBREWs, 2 vols., 12s. net.
*,.” Any Four Volumes may be had at original Subscription price of 21s. net.
Deussen (Prof. P.)—THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISHADS. The Religion and Philosophy of India. 8vo.
Dictionary of the Bible, A. (See page 2.)
Dods (Prof. Marcus)—TuHer BiBLe: 115 ORIGIN AND NaTuRE. Crown 8vo, 4s. 6d. net.
Dods (Marcus, M.A.)—FoRERUNNERS OF Danre. Crown 8vo, 4s. net.
Doedes—MANUAL OF NEW TESTAMENT HERMENEUTICS. Cr. 8vo, 3s.
Dollinger (Dr.)—HIPPOLYTUS AND CALLISTUS. 8vo, 6s. net.
DECLARATIONS AND LETTERS ON THE VATICAN DECREES, 1869-1887. Authorised Translation. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.
Dorner (Professor)—HISTORY OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE PERsuN uF CHRisT. Five vols. Subscription price, 26s, 3d. net.
SYSTEM OF CHRISTIAN DocTRINE. Subscription price, 21s. net.
SYSTEM OF CHRISTIAN ETHICS. 8vo, 14s.
Driver (Prof. 8. Β., D.D.)—An INTRODUCTION TO THE LITERATURE OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. (Jnternational Theological Library.) 7th Edition, post 8vo, 12s.
DrEUTERONOMY: A Critical and Exegetical Commentary.
(International Critical Commentary.) Third Edition, post 8vo, 12s.
Drummond (R. J., D.D.}—-THE RELATION OF THE APOSTOLIC TEACHING TO THE TEACHING OF CHRIST. Second Edition, 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Du Bose (Prof. W. P., D.D.)—THE ECUMENICAL CoUNCILS. (Eras of Church History.) 6s.
Duff (Prof. David, D.D.)—THE Earty CuuURCH. 8vo, 123s.
Dyke (Paul Van)—TuHE AGE OF THE RENASCENCE. With an Intro- duction by Henry Van DYKE. (Fras of Church History.) 6s.
Eadie (Professor)—COMMENTARIES ON ST. PAUL’s EPISTLES TO THE EPHESIANS, PHILIPPIANS, CoLossiANs. New and Revised Editions, Edited by Rev. Wm. Youne, M.A. Three vols. 8vo, 10s. 6d. each ; ov sez, 188. net.
Ebrard (Dr. J. H. A.)—TuE GosPEL History. 8vo, 6s. net.
APOLOGETICS. Three vols. 8vo, 18s. net.
COMMENTARY ON THE EPISTLES OF ST. JOHN. §8vo, 6s. net.
Edgar (R. M‘C., D.D.)—THE GOSPEL oF A RISEN SAVIOUR. 7s. 6d.
Elliott—On THE INSPIRATION OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURES. 8vo, 6s.
Eras of the Christian Church—Now complete in Ten Volumes—
Dv Boss (Prof. W. P., D.D.)—The Ecumenical Councils. 68. WATERMAN (L., D.D.)—The Post-Apostolic Age. 68.
DYKE (PavuL Van)—The Age of the Renascence. 68.
LockE (Cuiinton, D.D.)—The Age of the Great Western Schism. 6s. LupLow (J. M., D.D.)—The Age of the Crusades. 68.
VINCENT (Prof. M. R., D.D.)—The Age of Hildebrand. 6s.
CuaRK (Prof. W. R., LL.D., D.C.L.)—The Anglican Reformation. 68. WELLs (Prof. C. L.)—The Age of Charlemagne. 6s.
BARTLET (Prof. J. Vernon, M.A.)—The Apostolic Age. 68.
WaLKER (Prof. W., Ph.D., D.D.)—The Protestant Reformation. 6s.
Ernesti— BIBLICALINTERPRETATION OF NEW TESTAMENT, Two vols., 8s.
Ewald (Heinrich)—Hrsrew Syntax. 8vo, 8s. 6d.







T. and T. Clark’s Publicatzons. 5
Ewald (Heinrich)— REVELATION : Its Nature and Record. 8vo, 6s. net.
OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT THEOLOGY. 8vo, 6s. net.
Expository Times. Edited by James Hastincs, D.D. Monthly, 6d.
Fairbairn (Prin.)—THE REVELATION OF LAW IN SCRIPTURE, 8vo, 10s. 6d.
EZEKIEL AND THE BooK OF HIS PROPHECY. Fourth Edition
8vo, 10s. 6d.
PrRopHEcY. Second Edition, ὅνο, 10s. 6d. ᾿
PASTORAL THEOLOGY. Crown 8vo, 6s.
Fairweather (Rev. W., M.A.)—ORIGEN AND GREEK PATRISTIC THEOLOGY. 88.
Falconer (J. W., B.D.)—FrRom AposTtLe To Priest. <A Study of Early Church Organisation. Orown 8vo, 48. 6d.
Ferries (Rev. George, D.D.)—Tue GrRowTH OF CHRISTIAN FAITH. 8vo, 7s. 6d. net.
Fisher (Prof. G. P., D.D., LL.D.)—History OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE. (International Theological Library.) Second Edition, post 8vo, 12s.
Forbes (J. T., M.A.)\—Soorates. (Jn the Series of the World’s Epoch-Makers.) Crown 8vo, 3s.
Foreign Theological Library—Four Volumes for One Guinea. De- tailed List on application.
Forrest (Ὁ. W., D.D.)—TuHe Curist or HIsToRy AND oF Ex- PERIENCE. Fourth Edition, post 8vo, 6s.
Frank (Prof. F. H.)—System or CHRISTIAN CERTAINTY. 8vo, 6s. net.
Funcke (Otto)—THr Wor LD oF FAITH AND THE EVERYDAY WORLD, as displayed in the Footsteps of Abraham. Post ‘8vo, 7s. 6d.
Garvie (Prof. A. E., D.D.)—THE RITSCHLIAN THEOLOGY, 2nd Ed., 8vo, 98.
Gebhardt (H.)—Tur DocTRINE OF THE APOCALYPSE. ὅνο, 6s. net.
Geere (H. Valentine)—By NILE anp EvupHrates, A Record of Discovery and Adventure. Demy 8vo, price 8s. 6d. net. |
Gerlach—CoMMENTARY ON THE PENTATEUCH. 8vo, 6s. net.
Gieseler (Dr. J. C. L.)—EccLEsIAsTICAL History. Four vols. 8vo, 21s.
Given (Rev. Prof. J. J..\—TuHe TruTH oF SCRIPTURE IN CONNECTION WITH REVELATION, INSPIRATION, AND THE CANON. 8vo, 6s.
Gladden (Washington, D.D., LL.D.) THe CHRISTIAN PASTOR AND THE WoRKING CHuRoH. (International Theol. Library.) Post 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Glasgow (Frot.) — APOCALYPSE TRANSLATED AND EXPOUNDED. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Gloag (Paton J., D.D.)—THE MESSIANIC PROPHECIES. Cr. 8vo, 78. 6d.
INTRODUCTION TO THE CATHOLIC EPISTLES. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
INTRODUCTION TO THE SYNOPTIC GOSPELS. 8vo, 7s. 6d.
EXEGETICAL STUDIES. Crown 8vo, 5s.
THE PRIMEVAL WORLD. Crown 8vo, 3s.
Godet (Prof. F.)—AN INTRODUCTION To THE NEW TESTAMENT—
I. THe EpistTLes oF St. Pau. 8vo, 12s. 6d. net. II. THe GospeL CoLLEcTION, AND St. MATTHEW’s GOSPEL. ὅν, 6s. net.
CoMMENTARY ON St. LUKE’S GOSPEL. 2 vols. 8vo, 12s. net. COMMENTARY ON St. JOHN’S GOSPEL. 8 vols. 8vo, 18s. net. COMMENTARY ON EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS. 2 vols. 8vo, 12s. net. COMMENTARY ON 1ST EPISTLE TO CORINTHIANS. 2 vols. 8vo,
12s, net. *.* Any Four Volumes at the original Subscription price of 21s. net.
DEFENCE OF THE CHRISTIAN FartH. Crown 8vo, 4s. Goebel (Siegfried) —THk PARABLES OF JESUS. ὅνο, 6s. net.











6 T. and T. Clark's Publications.

Gotthold’s Emblems; or, INVISIBLE THINGS UNDERSTOOD BY THINGS THAT ARE Maps. Crown 8vo, ὅδ.
Gould (Prof. E. P., D.D.)\—St. Marx. (Jnternational Critical Commentary.) Post 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Gray (Prof. G. Buchanan, D.D.)—NumBErs. (International Critical Commentary.) Post 8vo, 12s.
Qrimm’s GREEK-ENGLISH LEXICON OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. ‘Trans- lated, Revised, and Enlarged by ΦΌΒΕΡΗ H. THayer, D.D. Demy 4to, 36s.
Guyot (Arnold, LL.D.)—CREATION; or, The Biblical Cosmogony in the Light of Modern Science. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo, 5s. 6d.
Hagenbach (Dr. K. R.)—History oF DocTRINES. 3 vols. 8vo, 18s. net.
HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION. 2 vols. 8vo, 12s. net.
Halcombe (Rev. J. J., M.A.)— WaT THINK WE OF THE GOSPELS ? 88. 6d.
Hall (Newman, D.D.)—Divingz BROTHERHOOD. 3rd Ed., cr. 8vo, 48.
Hamilton (T., D.D.)—B&YOND THE STARS; or, Heaven, its Inhabitants, Occupations, and Life. Third Edition, crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.
Harless (Dr. 0. A.)—SysTEM OF CHRISTIAN ETHICS. 8vo, 6s. net.
Harper (Pres. W. B., Ph.D.}—Amos anD HosEa. (Internattonal Critical Commentary.) Post 8vo, 12s.
Harris (8., D.D.)—GoD THE CREATOR AND LORD OF ALL. Two vols. post 8vo, 16s.
Hastie (The late Prof.)—THEOLOGY OF THE REFORMED CHURCH IN 115 FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES (Croall Lectures). Crown 8vo, 48. 6d. net.
OUTLINES OF PasTORAL THEOLOGY. For Young Ministers and Students. 18. 6d. net.
Haupt (Erich)—Tue First EpistLE oF St. JOHN. 8vo, 6s. net.
Havernick (H. A, Ch.)—INTRODUCTION TO OLD TESTAMENT. 6s. net.
Heard (Rev. J. B., M.A.) —THE TRIPARTITE NATURE OF MAN. Cr. 8vo, 6s.
OLD AND New THEOLOGY. AConstructiveCritique. Cr. 8vo, 6s.
ALEXANDRIAN AND CARTHAGINIAN THEOLOGY CONTRASTED. The Hulsean Lectures, 1892-98. Crown 8vo, 6s.
Hefele (Bishop)—A History OF THE COUNCILS OF THE CHURCH. Vol. I., toa.p. 825. Vol. II., a.p. 826 to 429. Vol. III., a.p. 481 to the close of the Council of Chalcedon, 451. Vol. IV., a.p. 451 to 680. Vol. V., a.p. 626 to 787. 8vo, 12s. each.
Henderson (Rev. H. F., M.A.)-—-THE RELIGIOUS CONTROVERSIES OF ScoTLanp. Post 8vo, 48. 6d. net.
Hengstenberg (Professor)—CoMMENTARY ON Psa.tms, 3 vols. 8vo, 18s. net; ECOLESIASTES, ETC., 8vo, ὅδ. net; EZEKIEL, 8vo, 6s. net; THE GENUINENEsS OF DANIEL, ETO., 8vo, 68. net; HisToRY oF THE KINGDOM OF Gop, 2 vols. 8vo, 128. net; CHRISTOLOGY OF THE OLD TESTAMENT, 4 vols,, 21s. net; St. JoHn’s GosPEL, 2 vols. 8vo, 21s.
*,." Any Four Volumes at the original Subscription price of 21s, net.
Herkless (Prof. J., D.D.)—FRANcIS AND Dominic. Crown 8vo, 3s.
Herzog—ENCYCLOPEDIA OF LIVING DIVINES, ETC., OF ALL Dkr- NOMINATIONS IN EUROPE AND AMERICA, (Supplement to Herzog’s Encyclo- pedia.) Imp. 8vo, 8s.
Hill (Rev. J. Hamlyn, D.D.)—St. EPHRAEM THE SYRIAN. 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Hilprecht (Prof. H. V.)—Exp.LoraTIONs IN ΒΙΒΙΒ Lanps. Large 8vo, 12s. 6d. net.
Hodgson (Principal J. M., M.A., D.8c., D.D.)—TuxoLoaia PEcTorIs: | Outlines of Religious Faith and Doctrine. Crown 8vo, 88. 6d.
Holborn (Alfred, M.A.)—THr PENTATEUCH IN THE LIGHT oF To-DAY.
A Simple Introduction to the Pentateuch on the Lines of the ‘Higher Criticism. Second Edition, crown 8vo, 2s. net.




7. and 7. Clark's Publecations. 7
Hudson (Prof. W. H.)—RovussEav, AND NATURALISM IN LIFE AND THoveHT. Crown 8vo, 88. Inge (W. B., D.D.)—Farra aND KNOWLEDGE. Post 8vo, 4s. 6d. net. Innes (A. D., M.A.)—CRANMER AND THE ENGLISH REFORMATION. Crown 8vo, 8s. Innes (A. Taylor)—TuHE TriaL or Jesus Curist. In its Legal Aspect. Second Edition, post 8vo, 2s. 6d. International Critical Commentary. Gray (Prof. G. BuocHanan, D.D.)—Numbers. 12s. Driver (Prof. 8. R., D.D.)—Deuteronomy. 12s, Moor_E (Prof. G. F., D.D.)—Judges. 12s. Smit (Prof. H. F D.D.} Samuel. 128.
Toy (Prof. C. H., D.D.)—Proverbs. 12s. HARPER (Pres. W. ΚῚ ΕΝ Amos and Hosea. 128. GovuLp (Prof. Εν. P., D.D.)}—St. Mark. 10s. 6d.
PLUMMER hupaee, D D.D. )—St. Luke. 12s. SanpDay (Prof. W., D.D.) and HEADLAM (Prin. A. C., D.D.)—Romans, 128. Axpsortt (Prof. T. Κ. ., B.D., D. Lit.)—-Ephesians and ‘Colossians. 10s. 6d. Vincent (Prof. M. R., D.D.)—Philippians and Philemon. 8s. 6d. Biee (Prof. C., D.D.)—St. Peter and St. Jude. 10s. 6d. For List of future Volumes see p. 15. International Theological Library. Davipson (Prof. A. B.}—Theology of the Old Testament. 12s. DrIvER (Prof. 8S. Β., D.D.)}—An Introduction to the Literature of the Old Testament. 125. Smita (Prof. H. P.)—Old Testament History. 12s. Smyta (Newman, D.D.)—Christian Ethics. 10s. 6d. Bruce (Prof. A. B., D.D.)—Apologetics. 10s. 6d. FisHer (Prof. G. P., D.D., LL.D.)—History of Christian Doctrine. 12s. ALLEN (Prof. A. V. G., D.D. )—Christian Institutions. 12s. McGiFrFeErt (Prof. A. C., Ph.D.)—The Apostolic Age. 12s. GLADDEN (WASHINGTON, D.D.)—The Christian Pastor. 10s. 6d. StrvEns (Prof. G. B., D.D.)—The Theology of the New Testament. 12s. The Christian Doctrine of Salvation. 12s. Rainy (Prin. R.)—The Ancient Catholic Church. 12s. For List of future Volumes see Ὁ. 14. Iverach (Princ. James, D.D. )—DESCARTES, SPINOZA, AND THE NEW PHILOSOPHY. Crown 8vo, 3s. Janet (Paul)—FinaL CausEs. Second Edition, demy 8vo, 12s. Tort THEORY OF MORALS. Demy 8vo, 10s. 6d. Johns (6. H. W., Μ.Α.}..-- ΤῊ OLpsEst ΟΟΡΕ ΟΕ Laws IN THE WORLD. e Code of Laws promulgated by Hammurabi, King of Babylon, B.c. 2285- 2242. Crown 8vo, ls. 6d. net. BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN Laws, CONTRACTS, AND LETTERS. Demy 8vo, 12s. net. Johnstone (P. De Lacy, M.A.)—MUHAMMAD AND HIS PowER. 98.
Johnstone (Prof. Β., D.D.)—CoMMENTARY ON 151 PETER. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Jones (ΕἸ. E. 0. ) ELEMENTS oF Locic. 8vo, 78. 6d.
Jordan (Rev. Louis H., B.D.)—ComPaRATIVE RELIGION: Its Genesis and Growth. Introduction by Principal FarrRBAIRN, D.D. 8vo, 12s. net.
Kaftan (Prof. J., D.D.)—Tue TRUTH OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION. Authorised Translation. 2 vols. 8vo, 16s. net.
Kant—TuHr MetTapHysic ΟΕ Eruics. Crown 8vo, 6s.
PHILOSOPHY OF Law. Trans. by W. HasTIE, D.D. Cr. 8vo, 5s,
PRINCIPLES OF POLITICS, ETC. Crown 8vo, 28. 6d.
Kennedy J ames, D.D.)—THE Nore-Link IN THE HEBREW SCRIPTURES. 4s. 6d. net.





8 7. and 7. Clark's Publications.
Keil (Prof.)—PENTATEUCH, 3 vols. 8vo, 18s. net; JOSHUA, JUDGES, AND Ruts, 8vo, 6s. net; SAMUEL, 8vo, 6s. net; Kines, 8vo, 6s. net; CHRONICLES, 8vo, 6s. net; Ezra, NEHEMIAH, EsTHER, 8vo, 6s. net; JEREMIAH, 2 vols. 8vo, 12s, net; EZEKIEL, 2 vols. 8vo, 12s. net; DANIEL, 8vo, 6s. net; ΜΙΝΟΒ PROPHETS, 2 vols. 8vo, 12s. net; INTRODUCTION TO THE CANONICAL SCRIPTURES OF THE OLD TESTAMENT, 2 vols. 8vo, 12s, net; HANDBOOK OF. BIBLICAL ARCHAOLOGY, 2 vols. 8vo, 12s. net.
*,”" Any Four Volumes at the origina] Subscription price of 21s. net. Keymer (Rev. N., M.A.)—NorTEs ΟΝ GENESIS. Crown 8vo, 18. 6d. Kidd (James, D.D.)—MORALITY AND RELIGION. ὅνο, 10s. 6d. Killen (Prof.)—THr FRAMEWORK OF THE CHURCH. 8vo, 9s.
THE OLD CATHOLIC CHURCH. 8vo, 9s.
THE IGNATIAN EPISTLES ENTIRELY Spurious. Cr. 8vo, 2s. 6d.
Kilpatrick (Prof. T. B., D.D.)—CHRISTIAN CHARACTER. 2s. 6d.
Konig (Dr. Ed.)—THE EXILes’ Book oF CONSOLATION (Deutero-Isaiah). Crown 8vo, 8s. 6d.
Konig (Dr. F. E.)—Tut RELIGIouS History OF ISRAEL. Cr. 8vo, 3s. 6d.
Krause (F. C. F.)—Tsr Ipzat or HuMANITY. Crown 8vo, 3s.
Krummacher (Dr. F. W.)—THE SUFFERING Saviour. Cr. 8vo, 6s.
DaviD, THE KiNG or ISRAEL. Second Edition, cr. 8vo, 6s.
AUTOBIOGRAPHY. Crown 8vo, 6s.
Kurtz (Prof.)—HaNDBOOK OF CHURCH History (from 1517). 8vo,7s. 6d.
HISTORY OF THE OLD CovENANT. Three vols. 8vo, 18s. net.
Ladd (Prof. G. T.)—THE DocTRINE or SACRED SCRIPTURE. Two vols. 8vo, 1600 pp., 248.
Laidlaw (Prof. J., D. D.)—THE BIBLE DOCTRINE OF MAN. Post 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Lambert (Rev. J. C., B.D.)—THE SacRAMENTS IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. Demy 8vo, price 10s. 6d.
Lane (Laura M.)—LiFE oF ALEXANDER VINET. Crown 8vo, 78. 6d. Lange (J. P., D.D.)—THE LiFe of ouR LorpD JESUS CHRIST. Edited by Marcus Dops, D.D. 2nd Edition, in 4 vols. 8vo, price 28s. net. COMMENTARIES ON THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS. Edited by PHi.tip ScnaFF, D.D. OLD TESTAMENT, 14 vols. ; NEw TESTAMENT, 10
vols. ; APOCRYPHA, 1 vol. Subscription price, net, 15s, each.
St. MATTHEW AND St. MARK, 3 vols. 8vo, 18s. net; St. LUKE, 2 vols. 8vo, 12s. net; St. JoHN, 2 vols. 8vo, 12s. net.
*,” Any Four Volumes at the original Subscription price of 21s. net.
Le Camus (E., Bishop of La Rochelle)—THr CHILDREN OF NAZARETH. Foap. 4to. 4s.
Lechler (Prof. 6. V., D.D.)—THE APposToLIc AND PosT-APOSTOLIC Times. Their Diversity and Unity in Lifeand Doctrine. 2 vols. cr. 8vo, 16s.
Lehmann: (Pastor)—ScENES FROM THE LIFF oF Jesus. Cr. 8vo, 3s. 6d.
Lewis (Tayler, LL.D.)—TuHE Six Days oF CrEATION. Cr. &vo, 7s. 6d.
Lidgett (Rev. J. Scott)—THE FaTHERHOOD OF GOD IN CHRISTIAN TRUTH AND LiFE, 8vo, 8s. net.
Lilley (J. P., D.D.)—THr Lorp’s Supper: Its Origin, Nature, and Use. Crown 8vo, 5s.
THE PASTORAL EPISTLES. 2s. 6d.
PRINCIPLES OF PROTESTANTISM. 2s. 6d.
Lillie (Arthur)—BuppHA AND BuppuHisM. Crown 8vo, 3s.
Lindsay (Prin. T. M., D.D.)—LuTHER AND THE GERMAN REFORMA- TION. Crown 8vo, 3s.
Lisco (F. G.)—PARABLES OF JESUS EXPLAINED. F cap. 8vo, 5s.
Locke (Clinton, D.D.)—-THz AGE oF THE GREAT WESTERN SCHISM. (Eras of Church History.) 6s.









T. and T. Clark's Publications. 9
Lotze (Hermann)—Microcosmus: An Essay concerning Man and his relation to the World. Cheaper Edition, 2 vols. 8vo (1450 pp.), 24s.
Ludlow (J. M., D.D.)—THr AcE oF THE CRUSADES. (Hras of Church History.) 8s.
Luthardt, Kahnis, and Brickner—THE CHURCH. Crown 8vo, 5s.
Luthardt (Prof. )}—St. JoHN THEAUTHOR OF THEFOURTHGOSPEL. 78.664.
COMMENTARY ON ST. JOHN’S GOSPEL. 3 vols. 8vo, 18s. net.
HIsToRY OF CHRISTIAN ETHICS. ὅνο, 6s. net.
APOLOGETIC LECTURES ON THE FUNDAMENTAL (7 E£d.), SAVING (6 Hd.), Mora TruTus oF CHRISTIANITY (4 Hd.). 3 vols. cr. 8vo, 6s. each,
Macdonald—INTRODUCTION TO PENTATEUCH. Two vols. 8vo, 12s. net.
CREATION AND THE FALL. 8vo, 6s. net.
Macgregor (Rev. Jas., D.D.)— THE APOLOGY OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
THE REVELATION AND THE RECORD: Essays on Matters of
Previous Question in the Proof of Christianity. 8vo, 7s. 6d.
STUDIES IN THE HISTORY OF NEW TESTAMENT APOLOGETICS. 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Macgregor (Rev. G. H. C., M.A.)—So Great SALVATION. Cr. 32mo, 18.
Macpherson (Rev. John, M.A.)—CoMMENTARY ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, §8vo, 10s. 6d.
CHRISTIAN DocMaTics. Post 8vo, 9s.
McCosh (James), Life of. 8vo, 9s.
McGiffert (Prof. A. ©., Ph.D.)—HistoRy OF CHRISTIANITY IN THE AposToLic AGE. (International Theological Library.) Post 8vo, 12s.
THE APOSTLES’ CREED. Post 8vo, 4s. net.
M‘Hardy (G., D.D.)—SavonaroLa. Crown 8vo, 3s.
M‘Intosh (Rev. Hugh, M.A.)—Is CuHRIsT INFALLIBLE AND THE BisLE TruE? Third Edition, post 8vo, 6s. net.
Mackintosh (Prof. Β., D.D.)—HEGEL AND HEGELIANISM. Crown 8vo, 88.
M‘Realsham (ΕἸ. D.)—Romans DissEcTED. A Critical Analysis of the Epistle to the Romans. Crown 8vo, 2s.
Mair (A., D.D.)—STUDIES IN THE CHRISTIAN Evipences, Third Edition, Revised and Enlarged, crown 8vo, 6s.
Martensen (Bishop)—CHRISTIAN DoGMATICS. 8vo, 6s. net.
CHRISTIAN Eruics. (GENERAL — INDIVIDUAL — SOCIAL.) Three vols. 8vo, 6s. net each.
Matheson (Geo., D.D.)—GROWTH OF THE SPIRIT OF CHRISTIANITY, from the First Century to the Dawn of the Lutheran Era. Two vols. 8vo, 21s.
Meyer (Dr.) — CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL COMMENTARIES ON THE New TESTAMENT. Twenty vols. 8vo. Subscription price, £5, 5s. net ; selection of Four Volumes at Subscription price of 218.; Non-Subscription price, 10s. 6d. each volume.
St. MATTHEW, 2 vols.; Mark AND LUKE, 2 vols.; St. JoHN, 2 vols. ;
Acts, 2 vols.; Romans, 2 vols. ; CORINTHIANS, 2 vols.; GALATIANS, one vol. ; EPHESIANS AND PHILEMON, one vol.; PHILIPPIANS AND COLOSSIANS, one vol. : THESSALONIANS (Dr. Liinemann), one vol. ; THE PasToRAL EPISTLES (Dr. Huther), one vol.; HEBrews (Dr. Liinemann), one vol. ; St. JAMES AND ST. JoHNn’s EpisTies (Huther), one vol. ; PETER AND JUDE (Dr. Huther), one vol.
Michie (Charles, M.A.)—BrBLE WORDS AND PHRASES. 18mo, 18.
Milligan (George, D.D.)—-THt THEOLOGY OF THE EPISTLE TO THE HeEsReEws. Post 8vo, 6s.
Milligan (Prof. W., D.D.)—THE RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD. Second Edition, crown 8vo, 4s. 6d.
Milligan (Prof. W., D.D.) and Moulton (W. F., D.D.) — Com-
MENTARY ON THE GosPFL oF ST. JoHN. Imp. 8vo, 98.









ΙΟ Ζ. and 7. Clark's Publications.
Moffatt (James, D.D.)—TuHx HistoricaL New TEesTaMENT. Second Edition, demy 8vo, 16s.
Moore (Prof. G. F., D.D.)—JUDGES. (International Critical Com- mentary.) Second Edition, post 8vo, 12s,
Morgan (J., D.D.)—SCRIPTURE TESTIMONY TO THE HOLY SPIRIT. 78,6d.
EXPOSITION OF THE FIRSTEPISTLE OF JOHN. 8vo, 78. 6d.
Moulton (James H., D.Litt.\—A GramMaR oF NEW TESTAMENT GREEK. Part I. The Prolegomena. Part II. (Jn the Press.)
Moulton (W. F., D.D.) and Geden (A. 8., M.A.)—A CoNcoRDANCE TO THE GREEK TESTAMENT. Crown 4to, 26s. net, and 31s. 6d. net.
Muir (Sir W.)—MoHAMMEDAN CONTROVERSY, Etc. 8vo, 7s. 6d.
InpIAN Mutiny. Two vols. 36s. net.
Muirhead (Dr. Lewis A.)—TuHer Times oF Curist. New Edition. With Map. 2s,
Miller (Dr. Julius)—TuH CHRISTIAN DocTRINE OF SIN. 2 vols., 12s. net.
Murphy (Professor)—COoMMENTARY ON THE PsaLMs. §8vo, 6s. net.
A CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL COMMENTARY ON Exopus. 98.
Naville (Ernest)—THE PROBLEM OF EvIL. Crown 8vo, 4s. 6d.
THECHRIST. Translated by Rev. T.J.DEsPR«s. Cr. 8vo, 48. 6d.
MopeERN Puysics. Crown 8vo, 5s.
Neander (Dr.)—CuurcH History. Eight vols. 8vo, £2, 2s. net.
Nicoll (W. Robertson, M.A., LL.D.)—THE INCARNATE SAVIOUR. Cheap Edition, price 3s. 6d.
Novalis—HymMns AND THOUGHTS ON RELIGION. Crown 8vo, 4s.
Oehler (Prof.)—THEOLOGY OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 2 vols., 12s. net.
Olshausen (Dr. H.)—BrIBLICAL COMMENTARY ON THE GOSPELS AND Acts. Four vols., 21s. net. Crown 8vo Edition, 4 vols., 24s.
ROMANS, one vol. 8vo, 6s. net; CORINTHIANS, one vol. 8vo, 6s. net ; PHILIPPIANS, TITUS, AND First TIMOTHY, one vol. 8vo, 6s. net.
Oosterzee (Dr. Van)—THE YEAR OF SALVATION. Two vols., 6s. each.
Mosss: A Biblical Study. Crown 8vo, 6s.
Orelli (Dr. C. von)—OLD TESTAMENT PROPHECY ; COMMENTARY ON IsAIAH ; JEREMIAH ; THE TWELVE MINOR PropuHets. 4 vols. Subscription price, 21s. net ; separate vols., 6s. net, each.
Orr (Prof. James, D.D.)—Davip Hume. Crown 8vo, 3s.
Owen (Dr. John)—Works. Best and only Complete Edition. Edited by Rev. Dr. Gootp. Twenty-four vols. 8vo, Subscription price, £4, 48.
. The ‘Hebrews’ may be had separately, in seven vols., £1, 68. net.
Palestine, Map of. Edited by J. G. BARTHOLOMEW, F.R.G.S., and Prof. G. A. SmitH, M.D., D.D. With complete Index. Scale—4 Miles to an Inch. In cloth, 10s. 6d. ; mounted on rollers, varnished, 15s.
Patrick (Rev. Principal W., D.D.)\—James THE BROTHER OF OUR Lorp. Post 8vo.
Philippi (F. A.)—CoMMENTARY ON THE ROMANS, Two vols. 8vo, 12s. net.
Piper—LIVES OF LEADERS OF CHURCH UNIVERSAL. Twovols. 8vo, 21s.
Popular Commentary on the New Testament. Edited by PHILIP Scuarr, D.D. With T[llustrations and Maps. Vol. 1.---ΤῊῈ SyNnoprican GosPELs. Vol. I].—St. JoHN’s GosPEL, AND THE AOTS OF THE APOSTLES. Vol. I1].—Romans To ΡΗΙΣΈΜΟΝ. Vol. I[V.—HEBREWs TO REVELATION. ἴῃ four vols. imperial 8vo, 12s. 6d. each.
Plummer (Alfred, D.D.)—St. Luxe. (International Critical Com- mentary.) Fourth Edition, post 8vo, 12s.
ENGLISH CHURCH History, 1509-1575. Crown 8vo, 3s. net.
ENGLISH CHURCH HIsTory, 1575-1649. Crown 8vo, 3s. net.
Pressensé (Edward de)—-THE REDEEMER: Discourses. Crown 8vo, 68.









T. and T. Clark's Publications. ΓΙ
Profeit (Rev. W., M.A.)—THE CREATION OF MATTER; or, Material Elements, Evolution, and Creation. Crown 8vo, 28. net.
Punjer (Bernhard)—HIsTuRY OF THE CHRISTIAN PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION FROM THE REFORMATION TO Kant. 8vo, 16s.
Purves (Rev. Dr. D.)—TuHt Lirz EVERLASTING. Crown 8vo, 4s. net.
Rabiger (Prof.)— ENCYCLOPZDIA OF THEOLOGY. Two vols. 8vo, 12s. net.
Rainy (Principal) — DELIVERY AND DEVELOPMENT OF CHRISTIAN DooTRINE. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
THE ANCIENT CaTHOLIC CHURCH. (International Theo- logical Library.) Post 8vo, 12s.
Rashdall (Rev. H., D.C. L.)—-CHRISTUS IN ECCLESIA. Post 8vo, 4s. 6d. net.
Reusch (Prof.)—NaTURE AND THE BIBLE; Lectures on the Mosaic History of Creation in relation to Natural Science. Two vols. 8vo, 21s.
Reuss (Professor)—HISTORY OF THE SACRED SCRIPTURES OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 640 pp. 8vo, 15s.
Riehm (Dr. E.)}—MEsSIANIC PROPHECY. New Edition. Post 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Ritchie (Prof. ἢ. G., M.A.)—PLato. Crown 8vo, 3s.
Ritschl (Albrecht, D.D.)—Tuer Curistian DoctRINE OF JUSTIFI- CATION AND RECONCILIATION. Second Edition, 8vo, 14s.
Ritter (Carl)—CoMPARATIVE GEOGRAPHY OF PALESTINE. 4 vols. 8vo, 21s.
Robinson (Rev. 8., D.D.)—DiscouRSES ON REDEMPTION. 8vo, 78. 6d.
Robinson (E., D.D.)—GREEK AND ENG. LEXICON OF THE N. TEST. 8vo,9s.
Rooke (T. G., B.A.)—INSPIRATION, and other Lectures. 8vo, 78. 6d.
Ross (C.)—Our FaTHER’s KINGDOM. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.
Ross (D. M., D.D.)—THeE TEACHING OF JESUS, (Bible-Class Handbooks.) 2s,
Rothe (Prof. )—SERMONS FOR THE CHRISTIAN YEAR. Cr. 8vo, 48. 6d.
Saisset-— MANUAL OF MODERN PANTHEISM. Two vols. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Salmond (Princ. 85. ἢ. F., D.D.)—THE CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE OF IMMORTALITY. Fifth Edition, post 8vo, 9s.
Sanday (Prof. W., D.D.) and Hea (Principal A. C., D.D.)—RomAns. (International Critical Commentary.) Third Edition, post 8vo, 12s.
Sanday (Prof. W.)—OUTLINES OF THE LIFE OF CHRIST. Post 8vo, 5s. net.
Sartorius (Dr. E.)—DoCTRINE oF DIVINE LOVE. ὅνο, 6s. net.
Sayce (Prof. A. H., LU.D.)—-THE RELIGIONS OF ANCIENT EGYPT AND BABYLONIA. Post 8vo, 8s. net.
Schaff (Professor)—-HistoRY OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH. (New Edition, thoroughly Revised and Enlarged.) Six ‘ Divisions,’ in 2 vols. each, extra 8vo.
1. APOSTOLIC CHRISTIANITY, A.D. 1-100, 2 vols. 21s. 2. ANTE-NICENE, A.D. 100-825, 2 vols., 21s. 8. NIcENE anD PosT-NICENE, A.D. 325-600, 2 vols., 21s, 4. MEDIAZVAL, A.D. 590-1078, 2 vols., 21s. (Completion of this Period, 1078-1517, in preparation), 5. THE Swiss REFORMATION, 2 vols., extra demy 8vo, 21s. 6. THE GERMAN REFORMATION, 2 vols., extra demy 8vo, 21s.
Schleiermacher’s CHRISTMAS Eve. Crown 8vo, 28.
Schubert (Prof. H. Von., D.D.)—THeE GosPet ΟΕ St. PETER. Synoptical Tables. With Translation and Critical Apparatus. 8vo, 1s. 6d. net. Schultz (Hermann)—-OLD TESTAMENT THEOLOGY. Two vols. 18s. net. Schiirer (Prof.)—History OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE. Five vols. Sub-
scription price, 26s. 3d. net. ** Index. In separate Volume. 25. 6d. net.
Schwartzkopff (Dr. P.)—THE PROPHECIES OF JESUS CHRIST. Cr. 8vo, 5s.
Scott (Jas., M.A., D.D.)—PRINCIPLES or NEW TESTAMENT QUOTATION ESTABLISHED AND APPLIED TO BIBLICAL ΟἈΙΤΙΟΙΒΜ. Cr. 8vo, 2nd Edit., 48.
Sell(K., D.D.) THE CHURCH IN THE MIRROR OF HISTORY. Cr. 8vo, 8s.6d.


12 T. and T. Clark's Publications.
Shaw (R. D., D.D.)\—TuHe Paving Episties: Introductory and Expository Studies. 8vo, 8s. net.
Shedd—SeERMONS TO THE SPIRITUAL MAN. ὅνο, 7s. 6d.
Dogmatic THEOLOGY. Three vols. ex. 8vo, 37s. 6d.
Sime (James, M.A.)—WILLIAM HERSCHEL AND HIS WorK. Cr. 8vo, 3s.
Simon (Prof.)—RECONCILIATION BY INCARNATION. Post 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Skene-Bickell—THE LORD’s SUPPER & THE PASSOVER RITUAL. 8vo, 5s.
Smeaton (Oliphant, M.A.)—THE MEDICI AND THE ITALIAN RENAIS- SANCE. 88.
Smith (Prof. H. P., D.D.)—I. anp II. βάσει, (International Critical Commentary.) "Post 8vo, 12s.
OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY. (International Theological Library.) 12s.
Smith (Professor Thos., D.D.)—MEDIAVAL MISSIONS. Cr. 8vo, 48. 6d.
——— ΕΟ: His Lire AND SysTEM. Crown 8vo, 3s.
Smyth (John, M.A., D.Ph.)—TroutH anpD REALITY. Crown 8vo, 4s.
Smyth (Newman, D.D. )—CurIsTIAN Etuics. (International Theo- logical Library.) Third Edition, post 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Snell (ΕΒ. J., M.A.)—WESLEY AND METHODISM. Crown 8vo, 3s.
Somerville (Rev. D., D.D.)—St. PAUL’s CONCEPTION OF CHRIST. 98.
Stahlin (Leonh.)—Kanr, LOTZE, AND RITSCHL. 8vo, 9s.
Stalker (Prof. Jas., D.D. ) —LiFE OF CHRIST. Large Type Edition, crown 8vo, 38. ed.
LiFE oF St. Pau. Large Type Edition, crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.
Stanton (V. H., D.D.)—TuHe JeEwisH AND THE CHRISTIAN MESSIAH. A Study in ‘the Earliest History of Christianity. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Stead (F. H.)—TuHe Kincpom ΟΕ Gop. Is. θά.
Steinmeyer (Dr. F. L.)—THE MIRACLES OF OUR LORD. 8vo, 7s. 6d.
—— THE PASSION AND RESURRECTION OF OUR LORD. &vo, 6s. net.
Stevens (Prof. G. B., D.D.)—Tae THEOLOGY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. (International Theological Library.) Post 8vo, 12s.
THE CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE OF SALVATION. (International Theological vorery. ) Post 8vo, 12s.
Stevenson (Mrs.)—THE SyMBOLIC PARABLES. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.
Steward (Rev. G.)—MEDIATORIAL SOVEREIGNTY. Two vols, 8vo, 21s.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS. 8vo, 10s.6d.
Stier (Dr. Rudolph)—-ON THE WorDs OF THE LoRD JzEsus. Eight vols. 8vo, Subscription price of £2, 2s. Separate volumes, price 6s. net.
Tur Worps OF THE RISEN SAVIOUR, AND COMMENTARY ON
THE EPISTLE OF St. JAMES. 8vo, 6s. net.
Tar WorpDs OF THE APOSTLES EXPOUNDED. ὅνο, 6a. net.
Stirling (Dr. J. Hutchison)—-PHILOSOPHY AND THEOLOGY. Post 8vo, 9s.
DARWINIANISM : Workmen and Work. Post 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Wuat ss THOUGHT? 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Strachan (Rev. J.. M.A.), Heprew IDEALS; from the Story of the Patriarchs. Part I. Crown 8vo, 2s. Part II. (Jn the Press.)
Tholuck (Prof.)—THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS. Two vols. feap. 8vo, 8s.
Thomson (J. E. H., D.D.)\—Booxs wHicH INFLUENCED Our LORD AND HIs APOSTLES. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Thomson (Rev. E. A.)—MEMORIALS OF A MINISTRY. Crown 8vo, 5s.
Tophel (Pastor 6.)---- ΤῊΝ Work OF THE HOLy SPIRIT. Cr. 8vo, 2s. 6d.
Toy (Prof. C. H., D.D.‘\—Proverss. (International Critical Com- mentary.) Post 8vo, 12s.











I. and 7. Clark's Publications. 13
Troup (Rev. G. Elmslie, M.A.)\—Worps To YouNG CHRISTIANS: Being Addresses to Young Communicants. On antique laid paper, chaste binding, feap. 8vo, 4s. 6d.
Uhlhorn(G.)—CHRISTIAN CHARITY IN THEANCIENTCHURCH. Cr. 8vo, 6s.
Ulimann (Dr. Carl)—THE SINLESSNESS OF JESUS. Crown 8vo, 5s.
Urwick (W., M.A.)—THE SERVANT OF JEHOVAH: A Commentary upon Isaiah 111. 18-- 111, 12; with Dissertations upon Isaiah xl.-lxvi. 8vo, 3s.
Vinet (Life and Writings of). By L. M. Lanz Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Vincent (Prof. M. R., D.D.)—THE AGE oF HILDEBRAND. (Eras of Church History.) 6s.
PHILIPPIANS AND PHILEMON. (International Critical Com- mentary.) Second Edition, post 8vo, 8s. 6d.
Walker (James, of Carnwath)—Essays, PAPERS, AND SERMONS. Post &vo, 6s.
Walker (J., D.D.)—THEOLOGY AaND THEOLOGIANS OF SCOTLAND. New Edition, crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.
Walker (Prof. W., D.D.)—THE PROTESTANT REFORMATION. (Fras of Church History.) 6s.
Walker(Rev. W. L.)—THESPIRIT AND THEINCARNATION. 2nd Ed.,8vo, 9s.
THE CROSS AND THE KINGDOM. 8vo, 9s.
Warfield (B. B., D.D.)—THe ΒΙΘΗΤ or Systematic THEOLOGY. Crown 8vo, 2s.
Waterman (L., D.D.)—TuHeE Post-ApostoLic AGE. (Eras of Church History.) 6s.
Watt (W. A., M.A., D.Ph.)—TuHeE THrEory oF CONTRACT IN ITS SOCIAL LIGHT. 8vo, 88.
A Strupy or SoctaL Morauity. Post 8vo, 6s.
Watts (Professor)—THr NEWER CRITICISM AND THE ANALOGY OF THE FaitH. Third Edition, crown 8vo, 5s.
THE REIGN OF CAUSALITY: A Vindication of the Scientific
Principle of Telic Causal Efficiency. Crown 8vo, 6s.
THE New APOLOGETIC. Crown &vo, 6s.
Weir (J. F., M.A.)—THE Way: THE NATURE AND MEANS OF REVELA- TION. Ex. crown 8vo, 6s. 6d.
Weiss (Prof. )}—BIsLICaAL THEOLOGY OF NEW TESTAMENT, 2 vols., 12s. net.
LIFE OF CHRIST. Three vols. 8vo, 18s. net.
Welch (Rev. A. C., B.D.)—ANSELM AND HIS WorRK. 3s.
Wells (Prof. 0. L.)—THk AGE OF CHARLEMAGNE. (Eras of the Christian Church.) 88.
Wendt (H. H., D.D.)—-THE TEACHING oF JESUS. Two vols. 8vo, 21s.
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN. 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Wenley (R. M.)—CoNTEMPORARY THEOLOGY AND THEISM, Cr. 8vo, 4s. 6d.
White (Rev. M.)—SymBo.icaL NUMBERS OF SCRIPTURE. Cr. 8vo, 48.
Williams (ΕἸ. F., D.D.)—-CHRISTIAN LIFE IN GERMANY. Crown 8vo, 5s.
Winer (Dr. G. B.)—A TREATISE ON THE GRAMMAR OF NEw TxstTa- MENT GREEK, regarded as the Basis of New Testament Exegesis. Third Edition, edited by W. F. Moutron, D.D. Ninth English Edition, 8vo, 15s.
Witherow(Prof.T.,D.D.)—THEFORMOFTHECHRISTIAN TEMPLE. 8vo,10/6.
Woods (F. H., B.D.)—TnHe Hope or ISRAEL. Crown 8vo, 3s. θα.
Workman (Prof. G. C.)\— THE TEXT OF JEREMIAH; or, A Critical Investi- gation of the Greek and Hebrew, etc. Post 8vo, 9s.
Wright (C. H.. D.D.)—BrsiicaL Essays. Crown 8vo, 5s.
Zahn (Prof. Theodor)—BREAD AND SALT FROM THE WoRD OF Gop. Sermons. Post 8vo, 4s. 6d. net.







14
T. and 7. Clark’s Publications.

THE INTERNATIONAL THEOLOGICAL LIBRARY.
This Library is designed to cover the whole field of Christian Theology. Hach volume
ts to be complete in itself, while, at the same time, it will form whole. It is intended to form a Series of Text-Books for S
art of a carefully planned Srudents of Theology. The
Authors will be scholars of recognised reputation tn the several branches of study assigned
to them. They will be associated
with each other and with the Editors in the effort to
provide a series of volumes which may adequately represent the present condition of
envestigation.
TWELVE VOLUMES OF THE SERIES ARE NOW READY, VIZ. :—
An Introduction to the Litera~ ture of the Old Testament.
Christian Ethics. Apologetics.
History of Christian Doctrine.
A History of Christianity in the Apostolic Age.
Christian Institutions.
The Christian Pastor.
The Theology of the New Testa- ment.
The Anoient Catholic Church.
Old Testament History.
The Theology of the Old Testa-
ment. Doctrine of Salvation. ,
8. R. Duiver, D.D., D.Litt., Regius Professor of Hebrew, and Canon of Christ Church, Oxford. [Seventh Edition. 12s.
Newman Smuyrtu, D.D., Pastor of the First Congregational Church, New Haven, Conn. {Third Edition. 10s. 6d. The late A. B. Brucr, D.D., Professor of New Testament Exegesis, Free Church College, Glasgow. [Third Edition. 10s. 6d. G. P. Fisner, D.D., LL.D., Professor of Ecclesiastical History, Yale University. Second Edition. [12s. ARTHUR CUusHMAN McGirrert, Ph.D., D.D., Professor of Church History, Union Theological Seminary, New. York.
(12s.
A. V. G. ALLEN, D.D., Professor of Ecclesiastical History, Episcopal Theological School, Cambridge, Mass. (12s. WASHINGTON GLADDEN, D.D., LL.D., Pastor of Congrega- tional Church, Columbus, Ohio. (10s. 6d. GrorGce B. Stevens, D.D., LL.D., Professor of Systematic Theology in Yale University, U.S.A. [12s. Ronen Ralnv, D.D., Principal of the New College, Edin- urgh. [12s.
H. P. Suits, D.D., Professor of Biblical History, Amherst College, U.S.A. (12s. The late A. B. Davipson, D.D., LL.D. Edited by the late Principal SaLmonp, D.D. (12s. GrorcE B. Stevens, D.D., LL.D., Professor of Systematic Theology, Yale University. (12s.
VOLUMES IN PREPARATION :—
The Reformation.
The Literature of the New Testament.
Contemporary History of the Old Testament.
The Early Latin Church.
Ganon and Text of the New Testament.
Contemporary History of the New Testament.
Philosophy of Religion.
Later Latin Church.
The Christian Preacher.
The Greek Oriental Churches.
Biblical Archeology.
The History of Religions,
Doctrine of God.
Doctrine of Christ.
Doctrine of Man,
Canon and Text of the Old Testament.
The Life of Christ.
Christian Symbolics.
Rabbinical Literature.
and
T. M. Linpsay, D.D., Principal of the United Free College, SgOW.
JaMEs Morratr, D.D., United Free Church, Dundonald, Scotland.
Francis Brown, D.D., D.Lit., Professor of Hebrew, Union Theological Seminary, New York.
CHaRLEs Biea, D.D., Regius Professor of Church History, and Canon of Christ Church, Oxford.
CasPaR Reneé Grecory, D.D., LL.D., Professor in the Uni- versity of Leipzig.
FRANK C. Porter, Ph.D., Yale University,
onn.
Ropget Fuint, D.D., LL,.D., Emeritus Professor of Divinity, University of Edinburgh.
E. W. Watson, M.A., Professor of Church History, King’s College, London.
W. T. Davison, D.D., Professor of Richmond, Surrey.
W. ΗΝ ADENEY, D.D., Principal of Lancashire College, Man- chester.
G. Bucnanan Gray, D.D., Professor of Hebrew, Mansfield College, Oxford.
GzorcE F. Moore, D.D., LL.D., Professor in Harvard University.
Wittiam Ν. Ciarxce, D.D., Professor of Systematic Theo- logy, Hamilton Theological Seminary, N.Y.
H. R. Maoxrinrosn, D.Phil, Professor of Systematic Theo- logy, The New College, Edinburgh,
WiLttiam P. Paterson, D.D., Professor of Divinity, Uni- versity of Edinburgh. -
ΒΕ, C. Burxirt, M.A., University Lecturer on Pal&ography, Trinity College, Cambridge.
WILLIAM Sanvay, D.D., LL.D., Lady Margaret Professor of Divinity, and Canon of Christ Church, Oxford.
C. A. Briaes, D.D., D.Lit., Professor of Theological Ency- clopedia, Union Seminary, New York.
8. Scuecuter, M.A., President of the Jewish Theological Seminary, N.Y.
New Haven,
Systematic Theology,
Τ᾽ and T. Clark's Publications. 15

THE INTERNATIONAL CRITICAL COMMENTARY.
TWELVE VOLUMES NOW READY, viz. :—
Numbers (Dr. Gray), Deuteronomy (Dr. Driver), Judges (Dr. Moore), I.yand II. Samuel (Dr. H. P. Smith), Proverbs (Dr. Toy), Amos and Hosea (Dr. Harper), 8. Mark (Dr. Gould), 8. Luke (Dr. Plummer), Romans (Dr. Sanday), Ephesians and Colossians (Dr. Abbott), Philippians and Philemon (Dr. Vincent), 8. Peter and 8, Jude (Dr. Bigg).
The following other Volumes are in course of preparation :—
Genesis.
Exodus. Leviticus.
Joshua.
Ruth.
Kings.
Chronicles.
Ezra and Nehemiah.
Esther. Paalms.
Ecclesiastes. Song of Songs and
Lamentations. Isaiah.
Jeremiah. Ezekiel.
Daniel.
Minor Prophets.
Synopsis of the Four Gospels.
Matthew.
Luke. Acts.
Corinthians.
Galatians.
Thessalonians.
The Pastoral Epistles. Hebrews. James.
The Johannine Epistles. Revelation.
THE OLD TESTAMENT.
JOHN SKINNER, D.D., Professor of Hebrew and Old Testament Exegesis, Westminster College, Cambridge.
A. R. 8. Kewnepy, D.D., Professor of Hebrew, University of Edinburgh.
J. F. STBNNING, M.A., Fellow of Wadham College, Oxford ; and the late H. A. White, M.A., Fellow of New College, Oxford.
Grorce Apa Suita, D.D., LL.D., Professor of Hebrew, United Free Church College, Glasgow.
C. P. Faanani, D.D., Associate Professor of Hebrew, Union Theological Seminary, New York.
Francis Brown, D.D., Litt.D., LL.D., Professor of Hebrew and Cognate Languages, Union Theological Seminary, New York.
Epwarp L. Curtis, D.D., Professor of Hebrew, Yale University, New Haven, Conn.
L. W. Batren, D.D., late Professor of Hebrew, P. E. Divinity School, Philadelphia.
L. B. Paton, Ph.D., Professor of Hebrew, Hartford Theological Seminary.
Guartes A. Bricas, D.D., Professor of Theological Encylopsedics and Symbolics, Union Theological Seminary, New York.
G. A. Barton, Ph.D., Professor of Biblical Literature, Bryn Mauer College, Pa., U.S.A.
CO. A. Briags, D.D., Union Theological Seminary, New York.
8, R. Driver, D.D., and G. BucHanan Gray, D.D., Oxford.
A, F. Kirkpatrick, D.D., Lady Margaret Professor of Divinity, and Master of Selwyn College, Cambridge.
6. A. Conxr, M.A., Fellow of Magdalen College, and C. F. Buryay, Litt.D., Fellow and Lecturer in Hebrew, St. J ohn’s College, Oxford.
JoHun P. Peters,’ D.D., late Professor of Hebrew, P. E. Divinity School, Philadelphia, now Rector of St. Michael’s Church, New York.
W. R. Harper, LL.D., President of the University of Chicago.
(Amos and Hosea ready, 12s.
THE NEW TESTAMENT.
W. Sanvay, D.D., LL.D., Lady Margaret Professor of Divinity, and Canon of Christ Church, Oxford; and W. C. ALLEN, M.A., Exeter College, Oxford.
WILLouGHBY C. ALLEN, M. Chaplain, Fellow, and Lecturer in Theo- logy and Hebrew, Exeter College, Oxford.
ALFRED PLoummsEr, D.D., late Master of University College, Durham.
[Ready, 12s.
C. H. Turner, M A., Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford; and H. N. Bate, M.A., late Fellow and Dean of Divinity in Magdalen College, Oxford, now Vicar of St. Stephen's, Hampstead, and Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of London.
The Right Rev. Arcn. Roperrson, 1).D., Lord Bishop of Exeter; and R. J. Know ina, D.D., Professor of Theology, Durham.
Ernest Ὁ. Burton, A.B., Professor of New Testament Literature, University of Chicago.
JamEs BE. Frame, M.A., Professor of Biblical Theology Union, Theo- logical Seminary, New York.
Water Lock, D.D., Dean Ireland’s Professor of Exegesis, Oxford.
A. Narrne, M.A., Professor of Hebrew, King’s College, London.
JaMES H. Roprgs, D.D., Bussey Professor of New Testament Criticism in Harvard University.
A. E. Brooke, Fellow of, and Divinity Lecturer in King’s College, Cambridge.
Rospert H. Cuarxizs, D.D., Professor of Biblical Greek in the University of Dublin.
Other engagements will be announced shortly.
16 T. and Τ' Clark's Publications.
The World's Epoch=Makers.
EDITED BY OLIPHANT SmxEaTon, M.A.
NEW SERIES. In Neat Crown 8vo Vo.tomess. Prick 38. EACH.
‘An excellent series of biographical studies.’— Athenszeum.
‘We advise our readers to keep a watch on this most able series.
It promises
to be a distinct success. The volumes before us are the most satisfactory books of the sort we have ever read.’—Methodist Times.
The following Volumes have now been issued :—
Buddha and Buddhism. LILLIE.
Luther and the German Reformation. By Principal T. M. Linpsay, D.D. Wesley and Methodism. By F. J.
SNELL, M.A. Cranmer and the English Reforma- ‘tion. By A. D. INNEs, M.A. William Herschel and his By JamEs SimE, M.A. Francis and Dominic. J. ΗΈΒΚΙ 85, D.D. Sayonarola. By G. M‘Harpy, D.D. - Anselm and his Work. By Rev. A. C. WELCH, B.D.
Origen and Greek Patristic Theology. By Rev. W. FAIRWEATHER, M.A. Muhammad and his Power. By P. Dr Lacy JoHnsTONE, M.A. (Oxon.). The Medici and the Italian Renais- sance. By OLIPHANT SMEATON,
M.A., Edinburgh.
By ARTHUR
Work.
By Professor
Plato. By Professor ἢ. G. RitcuHik, M.A., ἦτ, Ὁ, University of St. Andrews.
Pascal and the Port Royalists. By Professor W. Cuiark, LL.D., D.C.L., Trinity College, Toronto.
Euclid. By Emeritus Professor Toomas Smita, D.D., LL.D.
Hegel and Hegelianism. By Pro- fessor R. MackInTosH, D.D., Lanca- shire Independent College, Man- chester.
Hume and his Influence on Philo- sophy and Theology. By Professor J. Orr, D.D., Glasgow.
Rousseau and Naturalism in Life and Thought. By Professor W. H. Hupson, M.A.
Descartes, Spinoza, and the New Philosophy. By Principal J. Iveracug, D.D., Aberdeen.
Socrates. By Rev. J. T. Fores, M.A., Glasgow.
The following have also been arranged for :—
Marcus Aurelius and the Later Stoics. By F. W. Βυββει, D.D., Vice- Principal of Brasenose College, Oxford.
(In the Press.
Augustine and Latin Patristic Theo- logy. By Professor B. B. WARFIELD, D.D., Princeton.
Scotus Erigena and his Epoch. By Professor R. Latta, Ph.D., D.Sc., University of Aberdeen.
Wycllf and the Lollards. J. C. Carnzick, B.D.
The Two Bacons and Experimental Science. By Rev. W.J.CourEr, M.A.
By Rev.
Lessing and the New Humanism. By Rev. A. P. Davipson, M.A.
Kant and his Philosophical Reyolu- tion. By Professor R. M. WENLEY, D.Sc., Ph.D., University of Michi- gan.
Schleiermacher and the Rejuyen- escence of Theology. By Professor A. Martin, D.D., New College, Edinburgh.
Newman and his Influence. By C. SaroLgea, Ph.D., Litt. Doc., Uni- versity of Edinburgh.
BAS
meee MT 190, ert
| wut
202 292
The borrower must return this item on or before the last date stamped below. If another user places a recall for this item, the borrower will be notified of the need for an earlier return.
Non-receipt of overdue notices does not exempt the borrower from overdue fines.
Andover-Harvard Theological Library Cambridge, MA 02138 617-495.5788

Please handle with care. . Thank you for helping to preserve library collections at Harvard.
